## Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

Dianne Waddell Department of Management, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia Amrik S. Sohal Department of Management, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia

Traditionally, resistance has been cast as adversarial – the enemy of change that must be defeated if change is to be successful. While it is appar- ent that classical manage- ment theory viewed resis- tance in such a manner, recent literature contains much evidence that suggests resistance may indeed be useful and is not to be simply discounted. Present day suggestions and prescriptions for managing resistance have evidently disregarded this research and left little room for utility in resistance. This paper argues that the diffi- culty of organisational change is often exacerbated by the mismanagement of resistance derived from a simple set of assumptions that misunderstand resis- tance’s essential nature. It is suggested that management may greatly beneﬁt from techniques that carefully manage resistance to change by looking for ways of utilis- ing it rather than overcoming it.

# Introduction

Resistance to change has long been recog- nised as a critically important factor that can inﬂuence the success or otherwise of an organisational change effort. Research undertaken by Maurer (1996) indicated that one-half to two-thirds of all major corporate change efforts fail and resistance is the “lit- tle-recognised but critically important con- tributor” to that failure (p. 56). Research undertaken in the UK by Oakland and Sohal (1987) also found that resistance was one of the major impediments to the use of produc- tion management techniques by British pro- duction managers. Similarly, Eisen et al. (1992) and Terziovski et al. (1997) found resis- tance by management and workers to be the major impediment to the use of quality man- agement practices in Australian manufactur- ing industry.

Not that resistance is solely to blame for these statistics, Kotter et al. (1986) comment that there is a tendency amongst managers to approach change with a simple set of beliefs that end up exacerbating the problems that arise because they fail to understand them in any systematic manner. One such “simple belief” is that a change process that occurs with only minimal resistance must have been a good change that was managed well. This assumption is somewhat naïve and belies a common perspective that casts resistance in a negative light. Resistance is often viewed by managers as the enemy of change, the foe which must be overcome if a change effort is to be successful (Schein, 1988, p. 243).

success organisations have in securing suc- cessful change.

# Deﬁnitions of resistance

Schein (1988) believes resistance to change to be one of the most ubiquitous of organisa- tional phenomena. A number of authors have deﬁned resistance. For example, Ansoff (1988, p. 207) deﬁnes resistance as a multifaceted phenomenon, which introduces unantici- pated delays, costs and instabilities into the process of a strategic change, whilst Zaltman and Duncan (1977, p. 63) deﬁne resistance as any conduct that serves to maintain the status quo in the face of pressure to alter the status quo.

## Thus, resistance, in an organisational set-

ting, is an expression of reservation which nor mally arises as a response or reaction to change (Block 1989, p. 199). This expression is nor mally witnessed by management as any employee actions perceived as attempting to stop, delay, or alter change (Bemmels and Reshef, 1991, p. 231). Thus resistance is most commonly linked with negative employee attitudes or with counter-productive behaviours.

Understanding resistance over time

The writers of classical organisation theory viewed conﬂict as undesirable, detrimental to the organisation. Ideally it should not exist. Their prescription was simple. Elimi- nate it (Rowe and Boise, 1973, p. 151).

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

# © MCB University Press [ISSN 0025-1747]

## However, careful examination of the litera-

ture surrounding resistance indicates that this adversarial approach has little theoreti- cal support. Rather, a great deal of work undertaken during the 1960s and 1970s found that there is in fact utility to be gained from resistance, therefore it should not be avoided or quashed as suggested by classical manage- ment theory.

The review presented in this paper ﬁnds that this notion of utility in resistance has been largely disregarded by present day pre- scriptions for the management of change, and perhaps this is contributing to the lack of

Resistance has been classically understood as a foundation cause of conﬂict that is undesir- able and detrimental to organisational health. During the 1940s theorists considered unity of purpose to be the hallmark of a tech- nically efficient and superior organisation, whilst considering pluralism and divergent attitudes as greatly reducing the organisa- tion’s effectiveness and impeding its perfor- mance. Resistance was therefore understood as the emergence of divergent opinions that detract from the proﬁciency of the organisa- tion and the resistant worker was painted as a subversive whose individual self-interest

[ 543 ]

Dianne Waddell and Amrik S. Sohal Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

[ 544 ]

clashed with the general interest and well- being of the organisation. Resistance quickly became understood as the enemy of change, the foe which causes a change effort to be drawn out by factional dissent and in-ﬁght- ing. The prescription of this viewpoint was to eliminate resistance, quash it early and sweep it aside in order to make way for the coming change (see Rowe and Boise, 1973, p. 151; cf. Mooney, 1939; Urwick, 1947).

Early human resource theory also cast

resistance in a negative light by perceiving it as a for m of conﬂict that was indicative of a breakdown in the nor mal and healthy inter- actions that can exist between individuals and groups. Once again, the prescription was to avoid resistance in order to restore har- mony to the organisation (Milton et al., 1984, p. 480).

In the years that followed, the conception of

resistance to change beneﬁted greatly from the application of psychological, sociological and anthropological disciplines to study of management. As the understanding of resis- tance became increasingly sophisticated, it became clear that resistance is a far more complex phenomenon than once thought. Rather than being simply driven by the parochial self-interest of individual employ- ees, this research concluded that resistance was a function of a variety of social factors, including: • Rational factors: resistance can occur

where the employees’ own rational assess- ment of the outcomes of the proposed change differ with the outcomes envisaged by management. Such differences of opin- ion cast doubt in the employees’ mind as to the merit or worth of the changes, and thus they may choose to stand in opposition or voice concer n (Ansoff, 1988, p. 211; Grusky and Miller, 1970, p. 63; Kotter et al., 1986, p. 352).

- Non-rational factors:the reaction of an individual worker to a proposed change is also a function of predispositions and pref- erences which are not necessarily based on an economic-rational assessment of the change. These may include instances of resistance workers who simply do not wish to move offices, prefer working near a par- ticular friend, or are uncertain of the out- comes of implementing new technology (Judson, 1966, p. 19; Kaufman, 1971, p. 15; McNurry, 1973, p. 381; Sayles and Straus, 1960, p. 305).

- Political factors:resistance is also inﬂu- enced by political factors such as favouritism or “point scoring” against those initiating the change effort (Blau, 1970, p. 135 (cited in Grusky and Miller, 1970); Ansoff, 1988, p. 212).

- Management factors: inappropriate or poor management styles also contribute to resis- tance (Judson, 1966, p. 32; Lawrence, 1954, p. 53). As organisational theory developed over time, it drew attention to the fact that resis- tance to change is also built into organisa- tional factors. Systems, processes, sunk costs and so on, all contribute to a kind of inertia that inﬂuences an organisation toward greater reliability and predictability which, in tur n, acts against change (Kaufmann, 1971, p. 23; Tichy, 1983, p. 344; White and Bednar, 1991, p. 509; Zaltman and Duncan, 1977, p. 76). As a result of this research, resistance to change became recognised for what it truly is: a complex, multi-faceted phenomenon that is caused by a variety of factors. Further- more, a consensus of opinion began to for m that, contrary to classical theory, resistance (and the conﬂict that it can cause) may not be an enemy of change. Rather, there is a strong case that suggests that resistance should not be approached adversarially because it can play a useful role in an organisational change effort.

# The utility of resistance

Industrial progress ﬁnds one of its greatest handicaps in the frequent resistance of both management and workers to change of any sort (McNurry, 1973, p. 380).

Hultman (1979, p. 54) writes that “Unfortu- nately, when the word resistance is mentioned, we tend to ascribe negative con- notations to it. This is a misconception. There are many times when resistance is the most effective response available.” Leigh (1988, p. 73) also writes that “resistance is a perfectly legitimate response of a worker” and Zaltman and Duncan (1977, p. 62) cite Rubin saying that resistance should be used constructively.

That resistance can play a useful role in an organisational change effort certainly stands juxtaposed to a traditional mindset that would view it as an obstacle that is nor mally encountered on the way to a successful change process. Nevertheless, it is a conclu- sion reached by a variety of authors who suggest that there are a number of advan- tages of resistance. When managed carefully, these advantages can in fact be utilised by the organisation to greatly assist change.

First of all, resistance points out that it is a fallacy to consider change itself to be inher- ently good. Change can only be evaluated by its consequences, and these cannot be known with any certainty until the change effort has

Dianne Waddell and Amrik S. Sohal Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

been completed and sufficient time has passed (Hultman, 1979, p. 53).

To this end, resistance plays a crucial role

in inﬂuencing the organisation toward greater stability. While pressure from exter- nal and inter nal environments continue to encourage change, resistance is a factor that can balance these demands against the need for constancy and stability. Human systems remaining in a steady state encourage processes and specialisations to stabilise, consolidate, and improve which allows the organisation a level of predictability and control. Thus, the system is able to gain a certain momentum or rhythm that is also critical for organisational survival (Albanese, 1973, pp. 413-17; Hultman, 1979, p. 53). While these maintenance needs are widely recognised, the emphasis in the litera- ture certainly remains on the requirements of change and dynamism. The challenge therefore is to ﬁnd the right balance between change and stability; avoiding the dysfunc- tionality of too much change while ensuring stability does not become stagnation.

As our understanding of resistance has

become increasingly clear, it has also become apparent that people do not resist change per se, rather they resist the uncertainties and potential outcomes that change can cause. Resistance to a change is not the fundamen- tal problem to be solved. Rather, any resis- tance is usually a symptom of more basic problems underlying the particular situa- tion. Resistance can [therefore] serve as a war ning signal directing the timing of tech- nological changes (Judson, 1966, p. 69).

As such, resistance plays a crucial role in drawing attention to aspects of change that may be inappropriate, not well thought through, or perhaps plain wrong. Either way, it is the organisation’s method of communica- tion, therefore attempting to eliminate resis- tance as soon as it arises is akin to shooting the messenger who delivers bad news. Speciﬁcally,[management] can use the nature of the resistance as an indicator of the cause of resistance. It will be most help- ful as a symptom if [management] diagnoses the causes for it when it occurs rather than inhibiting it at once (Bartlett and Kayser, 1972, p. 407).

A further advantage that resistance contributes to the change process is an inﬂux of energy. Psychologists have long understood the danger of apathy or acquiescence when there is a need for growth and development. We are all familiar with the classic adage “you can not help the person who will not ﬁrst help themselves”, rather the individual requires a certain dissatisfaction with their current or future states in order to gain

sufficient motivation to do something about it. In the same way, there is a certain level of motivation or energy required to implement change in an organisation.

Where a workplace is marked by apathy or

passivity, implementing change is a very difficult task (Litterer, 1973, p. 152). With resistance and conﬂict comes the energy or motivation to seriously address the problem at hand. Where energy is lacking, change is often uncreative, sparsely implemented, and inadequately utilised. Where resistance is at play, there is a need to examine more closely the problems that exist and consider more deeply the changes proposed. Once again, though, a balance must be maintained. Where conﬂict becomes too great, it may assume the focus of the energy causing the issues created to recede into the background. Consequently, authors speak of an “optimal level of motiva- tion” (Thomas and Bennis, 1972, p. 383) that will serve the change process and possibly improve its outcome.

In addition to injecting energy into a

change process, resistance also encourages the search for alter native methods and out- comes in order to synthesise the conﬂicting opinions that may exist. Thus resistance becomes a critical source of innovation in a change process as more possibilities are con- sidered and evaluated.

Often a particular solution is known to be favoured by management and consequently does not beneﬁt from a thorough discussion. Under such circumstances, acceptance is built in, and the organisation’s growth and change is limited to the diagnostic and prescriptive capabilities of those who pro- posed the change (Albanese, 1973, p. 418).

This aspect of resistance cannot be under- stated in its importance. Herbert Simon’s (1976) work into the rational decision, for example, drew attention to the fact that many management decisions are non-rational because they simply do not generate a suffi- cient number of alter native solutions to a problem, nor are these alter natives adequately evaluated. Further more, Janis’s (1982) notion of group-think highlights the danger of confor mity in group decision mak- ing and the importance of vigorous debate, thus resistance similarly plays a crucial role. As Maurer points out:

Resistance is what keeps us from attaching ourselves to every boneheaded idea that comes along (Maurer, 1996).

In combination, these aspects of resistance make a persuasive case for re-evaluating the classical understanding of resistance. Equally, they call into question the assump- tion that a change effort that is met with little resistance should be automatically deemed a

[ 545 ]

Dianne Waddell and Amrik S. Sohal Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

[ 546 ]

“good” change. The legislative process, for example, is predicated upon resistance play- ing a crucial role in ensuring the best possi- ble laws are produced. Resistance, in the for m of rivalry between (at least) two parties, injects energy into the process and sparks debate where opinions differ. Resistance encourages greater scrutiny of legislation. It prompts the search for a variety of alter na- tives and evaluates these with greater rigour. It also means that the implementation process will be considered carefully, thereby improving the adoption of these changes by the general public.

Imagine then, a situation where new legis- lation that considerably alters an established law is enacted by parliament via a process that is marked by little resistance. It would certainly raise concer ns that the new law has not been adequately scrutinised, nor had the beneﬁt of vigorous debate. If the process of implementation is not well thought out, it may only be sparsely adopted by the general public, rendering the law ineffective.

# The management of resistance

The suggestions and prescriptions of correct resistance management contain a curious dualism; while they appear to embrace much of the understanding of resistance gained from the 1960s and 1970s they simultaneously ignore the suggestion that, in certain instances, there is utility to be gained.

The overwhelming suggestion in the man- agement literature is that participative tech- niques are the best method of handling resis- tance. Employee participation in manage- ment as a means of resolving resistance has been investigated since the mid 1940s. The now classic studies by Lewin (1991) and Coch and French (1948) both concluded that involvement in the lear ning, planning and implementation stages of a change process signiﬁcantly inﬂuences commitment to change and apparently lowers resistance. This theme has been taken up widely in man- agement literature and for ms the backbone of signiﬁcant management schools of thought, such as organisation development theory and human resource management (Milton et al., 1984, pp. 481-2).

Essentially, the argument behind participa- tive management techniques is that, through a carefully managed process of two way com- munication, infor mation sharing and consul- tation, employees tend to become more com- mitted to the change effort, rather than sim- ply remaining compliant with it (Kotter et al., 1986, p. 355; Makin et al., 1989, p. 165; White and Bednar, 1991, p. 510). Without entering the

debate with regard to the pros and cons of participative management styles, it is appar- ent that such techniques are strongly advo- cated where resistance is expected to be high; the goal being to simply reduce the level of resistance actually encountered. The latent assumption apparently is that the less resis- tance encountered by a change effort, the better. Very rarely is it suggested that resis- tance should be utilised.

It appears, then, that the lear ning of the 1960s and the 1970s has been forgotten. There is a notable absence of change management models and theories that actually incorporate the possibility of utility in resistance. While it is commonly suggested that managers prepare for the change process by estimating the degree of resistance they expect to encounter, rarely is it suggested that the nature of this resistance be diagnosed to see if there is any beneﬁt to be gained from its utili- sation.

The fact that management theory has

apparently not embraced the notion of utility in resistance suggests that an adversarial approach to resistance, reminiscent of that found in classical management theory, is still the prevalent mindset of managers. Resis- tance continues to be viewed as the enemy of change that must be “overcome” and partici- pative techniques are the techniques advo- cated to achieve this end.

Research conducted by Maurer (1996) sup- ports this point. He found that the predomi- nant way implementors of change responded to employees’ reactions was to resist their resistance – that is, meet force with force. Most often this occurred through the force of reason. Infor mation “sharing” often amounted to little more than infor mation “battering” where the recipients of change are confronted with a barrage of slide shows, data analysis and hefty reports. Though these techniques may be categorised as participa- tive in for m, they are far from participative in nature. They amount to little more than an exercise in salesmanship and clearly illus- trate an adversarial management mindset.

Conclusion – rethinking resistance

The intention of this review is not to provide neat answers to the complicated problems associated with resistance. Rather, it is to point out that, although the theoretical understanding of resistance is well advanced, it is apparent that this knowledge has not impacted common perceptions of manage- ment and therefore has not transferred into the development of solid resistance manage- ment techniques.

Dianne Waddell and Amrik S. Sohal Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

The review has found that resistance

remains to this day a complex, multi-faceted phenomenon that continues to affect the outcomes of change, both negatively and positively. Although research has procured a solid understanding of resistance and the beneﬁts that can accrue to an organisation through its proper utilisation, it appears that the classical adversarial approach remains the dominant means of managing resistance because such lear ning is not reﬂected in moder n management techniques.

It would be drawing a long bow to say that the answer to the problem of resistance man- agement is to simply begin to employ tech- niques that hold the possibility of utility in resistance. This is not the conclusion of this review. Rather it is to point out that moder n management has only applied certain aspects of earlier research (for example using partici- pative techniques) while apparently ignoring others. The suggestion is that resistance management may improve signiﬁcantly if the adversarial approach is replaced with one that retains the possibility of beneﬁting through the utilisation of resistance.

As has already been mentioned before,

people do not resist change per se, rather they resist the uncertainties and the potential outcomes that change can cause. Managers must keep this in mind at all times. Resis- tance can play a crucial role in drawing everyone’s attention to aspects of change that may be inappropriate, not well thought through or perhaps plain wrong. In this case managers should be encouraged to search for alter native methods of introducing the change. They must communicate and consult regularly with their employees. This is per- haps one of the most critical success factors in implementing change in an organisation. Employees must be given the opportunity to be involved in all aspects of the change pro- ject and they must be given the opportunity to provide feedback. Teamwork involving man- agement and employees can overcome many of the difficulties experienced by organisa- tions in the past. Managers should facilitate teamwork, they should empower their work- ers to be involved and they should provide the right environment and the necessary resources for employees to take part.

In ter ms of further research in this area,

there are considerable opportunities. Researchers can develop appropriate tech- niques for measuring resistance in different situations. More importantly, research docu- menting how these techniques have been applied and how managers have gained util- ity from resistance would be of considerable beneﬁt to managers. In-depth case studies in this respect would be invaluable.

References Albanese, R. (1973), “Overcoming resistance to stability”, in Bartlett, A. and Kayser, T., Changing Organisational Behaviour, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

## Ansoff, I. (1988), T he New Corporate Strategy, John

# Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.

Bartlett, A. and Kayser, T. (1973), Changing Organ- isational Behaviour, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Bemmels, B. and Reshef, Y. (1991), “Manufactur- ing employees and technological change”, Journal of Labour Research, Vol. 12 No. 3, Summer, pp. 231-46.

Block, P. (1989), “Flawless consulting”, in McLen- nan, R. (1989), Managing Organisational Change, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Coch, L. and French J. (1948), “Overcoming resis- tance to change”, Human Relations, Vol. I.

Eisen, H., Mulraney, B.J. and Sohal, A.S. (1992), “Impediments to the adoption of moder n quality management practices”, International Journal of Quality and Reliability Manage- ment, Vol. 9 No. 5, pp. 17-41.

Grusky, O. and Miller, G. (1970), T he Sociology of Organisations, Free Press, New York, NY. Hultman, K. (1979), T he Path of Least Resistance,

# Lear ning Concepts, Denton, TX.

## Janis, I. (1982), Groupthink: Psychological Studies

## of Policy Decisions and Fiascos, 2nd ed., Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA.

Judson, A. (1966), A Managers Guide to Making Changes, John Wiley & Sons, London.

## Kaufman, H. (1971), T he Limits of Organisational

## Change, University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa, AL.

Kotter, J. Schlesinger, L. and Sathe, V. (1986),

Organisation, 2nd ed, Irwin, Homewood, IL. Lawrence, P. (1954), “How to deal with resistance to change”, Harvard Business Review, May- June, pp. 49-57.

## Leigh, A. (1988), Effective Change, Institute of

# Personnel Management, London.

Lewin, K. (1991), in White, D. and Bednar, D.,

## Organisational Behaviour, Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA, p. 510.

Litterer, J. (1973), “Conﬂict in organisation: a re- examination” in Rowe, L. and Boise, B. (Eds), Organisational & Managerial Innovation, Goodyear, Santa Monica, CA.

Makin, P., Cooper, C. and Cox, C. (1989), Managing People at Work, Quorum Books, Westport, CT. Maurer, R. (1996), “Using resistance to build sup-

## port for change”, Journal for Quality & Partic- ipation, June, pp. 56-63.

McNurry, R. (1973), “The problem of resistance to change in industry”, in Bartlett, A. and Kayser, T., Changing Organisational Behav- iour, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Milton, C., Entrekin, L. and Stening, B. (1984),

Organisational Behaviour in Australia, Pren- tice Hall, Sydney.

[ 547 ]

Dianne Waddell and Amrik S. Sohal Resistance: a constructive tool for change management

# Management Decision 36/ 8 [1998] 543–548

[ 548 ]

Mooney, J. (1939), T he Principles of Organisation,

# Harper and Row, New York, NY.

## Oakland, J. and Sohal, A.S. (1987), “Production

management techniques in UK manufactur- ing industry: usage and barriers”, Interna- tional Journal of Operations and Production Management, Vol. 7 No. 1, pp. 8-37.

Rowe, L. and Boise, B. (Eds) (1973) , Organisa-

## tional & Managerial Innovation, Goodyear, Santa Monica, CA.

Sayles, L. and Straus, G. (1960), Human Behaviour in Organisations, Prentice Hall, London. Schein, E. (1988), Organisational Psychology, 3rd ed., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Simon, H. (1976), Administrative Behaviour, The

# Free Press, New York, NY.

Terziovski, M., Sohal, A.S. and Moss, S. (1997), A Longitudunal Study of Quality Management Practices in Australian Organisations, Depart- ment of Management, Monash University, Melbour ne.

## Tichy, N. (1983), Managing Strategic Change, John

# Wiley & Sons, New York, NY.

# Application questions

# 1 Discuss some examples where resistance

to change has proved useful.

Thomas, J. and Bennis, W. (1972), T he Manage- ment of Change and Conﬂict, Penguin, Har- mondsworth, UK.

Urwick, L. (1947), T he Elements of Administration,

# (2nd ed.), Pitman, London.

White, D. and Bednar, D. (1991), Organisational Behaviour, Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA. Zaltman, G. and Duncan, R. (1977), Strategies for

# Planned Change, Wiley, Toronto.

Further reading Ritvo, R., Litwin, A. and Lee, B. (1995), Managing in T he Age of Change, Irwin, Homewood, IL. Salaman, G. (1979), Work Organisation: Resistance

# and Control, Longman, London.

## Wexley, K. and Yukl, G. (1977), Organisational

## Behaviour and Personnel Psychology, Richard Irwin, Homewood, IL.

Willsmore, A. (1973), Managing Modern Man,

# Pitman, London.

## Woodman, R. and Pasmore, W. (1989), Research in

Organisational Change & Development, Vol. 3, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT.

2 Is “change management” an area worthy

of study in its own right?