# Digital Article

# Organizational Learning

## Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development Initiatives

Five ways to ensure your L&D investments pay off. by Bruce C. Rudy

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

## Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development Initiatives

Five ways to ensure your L&D investments pay off. by Bruce C. Rudy

## Published on HBR.org / October 16, 2023 / Reprint H07TEC

# Yaroslav Danylchenko/Stocksy

Learning and development (L&D) programs have a problem: They are

expensive, yield diﬃcult-to-track outcomes, and typically generate a

poor return on investment (ROI) for the ﬁrm. Yet L&D is critical to

bringing the ﬁrm closer to that ever-elusive goal of becoming a true

learning organization that is innovative and can adapt to changing

competitive environments. So, how can your ﬁrm ensure it is getting

# the most out of its L&D investment?

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

1

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

The ﬁrst step is to quantify baseline performance before training —

but it’s not enough to assess what the learner already knows. To help

you target training to the individuals and teams most in need, you also

want to understand how they contribute to team and organizational

outcomes. Indeed, research suggests that training programs that start

with a needs analysis prior to training result in learners being far more

likely to retain and apply what they learn. However, performing a

needs analysis is time consuming, and there is a lack of standardization

around how to perform them.

# Enter Balanced Benchmarking

What we now call balanced benchmarking was developed in the 1970s

as a process to measure and improve operations management. It

essentially uses an equation with input variables (for example, the

## number of employees at various bank branch locations or the salaries of

a group of sales employees) that generate output variables (for example,

the amount of deposits at each bank branch or the sales generated by

each of the sales employees). Balanced benchmarking optimizes this

equation using a linear programming technique that minimizes the

inputs and maximizes the outputs. The result is a relative performance

## assessment (i.e., the eﬃciency of the performance of each individual or

team relative to every other individual or team measured) based on the

inputs and outputs selected.

# Balanced Benchmarking in Action

In my research with a ﬁrm in the legal services industry, we applied

balanced benchmarking with an L&D approach called learning in the

ﬂow of work to generate signiﬁcant improvement in performance and

a quantiﬁable ROI on the ﬁrm’s L&D investment. The company’s

structure allowed us to treat each attorney as a strategic business

unit with their own proﬁt-and-loss statement, thus making the

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

2

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

balanced benchmarking approach an ideal tool to assess their relative

# performance.

For the input variables in the balanced benchmarking equation (i.e.,

those variables we wanted to minimize), we used the attorney’s salaries

and their non-billed hours (i.e., hours that the attorneys worked on

client cases but were not able to be billed for some reason). For the

output variables (i.e., variables we wanted to maximize), we used the

attorney’s billed hours, fees received, number of referred clients, and

client satisfaction reviews. We performed the balanced benchmarking

approach monthly for each attorney in the ﬁrm over the course of a

year, allowing us to quantify the performance of each attorney relative

# to the other attorneys in the group.

The balanced benchmarking approach allowed us to quantify how

much the underperforming attorneys were lagging their higher-

performing peers. This meant the ﬁrm could focus on the performance

of speciﬁc attorneys with an understanding of how they should be performing. Additionally, the balanced benchmarking approach oﬀered

us the opportunity to quantify the impact of qualitative metrics (e.g.,

# customer satisfaction reviews).

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

3

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

See more HBR charts in Data & Visuals on HBR.org.

In the example output above, Attorney 5 is performing the best relative

to the other four attorneys. While Attorney 5 did not bill the most hours

or receive the most fees for the ﬁrm, the combination of their lower

salary and fewer nonbilled hours (the model inputs) with their strong

outputs yielded the highest overall performance. At the other end of the

spectrum, Attorney 2 has the most room for improvement, as we would

expect them to be generating 16.77% more outputs (100% minus 83.23%)

for their given inputs.

## Utilizing Balanced Benchmarking in Your Organization

While the analytics underlying the balanced benchmarking approach

are complex, utilizing this approach to assess performance in an

organization is manageable thanks to the work of researchers in this

space. Here are several suggestions to help you get started.

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

4

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

Variable selection is key.

The variables chosen for balanced benchmarking are arguably the most

important part of using this approach to assess performance. You’ll

need to think deeply about which variables you want the model to

minimize (i.e., the input variables) and maximize (i.e., the output

variables). Data on these variables needs to be regularly collected and

readily accessible, and must be tied back to factors that the individual

or team has control over. For example, requiring a marketing team

to minimize operational expenses associated with the production of

the product or service they are selling is outside of their control. It

would be more appropriate to require the marketing team to minimize

discretionary spending (e.g., travel, dining, etc.) associated with their

selling activity.

# Watch for outliers.

As with any analytical approach, outliers in the data can have signiﬁcant eﬀects on the results of the analysis. This is even more

critical with balanced benchmarking because it is a relative analysis —

that is, the individuals or teams in the analysis are compared against

one another. Thus, it is important to pay attention to outliers in your

data, as they can cause inaccuracies in your ﬁndings. We’ve found

that it’s best to remove the team or individual with the outlying data

from the analysis for a speciﬁc time period, as this will generate more

# accurate results.

Collect baseline data before applying training.

As an extension of the above recommendation, we strongly recommend

that you collect data for your balanced benchmarking approach

over several time periods prior to making any assessment decisions.

Collecting and analyzing this data does two things. First, it helps you

become more comfortable with the data and determine whether you

are capturing the proper variables. Second, it provides a baseline for

you to compare future performance against. While it will be tempting to

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

5

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

act based on the outcomes of a balanced benchmarking approach, it is

best to understand the data ﬁrst and apply the appropriate training only

after you have this understanding.

Connect the variables back to training.

It’s not enough to simply understand which teams or individuals in

your organization are performing at a higher or lower level relative

to the other teams or individuals. The next step is to apply training

to those low-performing teams and individuals to improve their

# performance.

To do this, you must use variables in the analysis that can be directly

impacted by training. In our research within the law ﬁrm, we were able

to readily identify the high and low performers utilizing the variables

described above. The next step we took was providing the partners

with leadership development training that taught them skills to help

them coach for performance. It wasn’t enough to demonstrate to the

partners who the high- and low-performing attorneys in the ﬁrm were;

we had to go one step further and give them the tools to help the

struggling attorneys. By combining balanced benchmarking and this skills training, the partners were able to more eﬀectively lead the

attorneys, resulting in roughly a 15% annual increase in hours billed

that generated additional revenues of nearly $1 million. Assuming a

## ﬂat rate annual cost of $7,500/learner for the training, this investment

would have yielded the law ﬁrm an annual rate of return of more than

950%!

Expand your data beyond your organization.

Balanced benchmarking provides a relative measure of performance for

all teams or individuals included in the analysis. While it’s easiest to

perform this analysis within the ﬁrm because that data is accessible, the

resultant analysis will only tell you who is performing better and worse

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

6

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

within the ﬁrm. This is helpful, but you won’t know what the true best

performance looks like in your industry.

To the extent that you can collect data from competitors on similar

performance metrics, you’ll be able to gain a better understanding

of where your ﬁrm’s performance stands relative to the industry.

Competitor data is diﬃcult to collect, but you will be surprised at what

you can learn from industry veterans within your organization. Simple

conversations with these individuals are likely to uncover a wealth

of information about competitor performance metrics. For example,

## through conversations with partners in the law ﬁrm and attorneys who

joined from competing ﬁrms, we were able to estimate an industry-

level balanced benchmarking model that allowed us to compare the

performance of the ﬁrm’s attorneys against the industry standard.

Today, more than ever, L&D programs are critical to organizations’

success. The changes occurring at the economic, global, environmental,

and societal levels demand that companies continue to upskill their

employees to maintain their competitive advantage. It’s the only way to

ensure that ﬁrms have the capabilities to succeed in today’s volatile,

## uncertain, complex, and ambiguous environments. Historically, the

challenge with implementing L&D programs has been the diﬃculty

in quantifying the impacts on organizational performance. Utilizing a

balanced benchmarking approach to assess training needs and applying training where it can be most eﬀective is an approach that can overcome

this challenge and ensure your organization is getting the most out of its

# L&D programs.

This article was originally published online on October 16, 2023.

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

7

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

# HBR / Digital Article / Evaluating ROI on Your Company’s Learning and Development In…

Bruce C. Rudy is a strategy professor at the University of Texas at San Antonio’s Alvarez College of Business and the former director of executive education programming at its Center for Professional Excellence. He is the founder and CEO of Popcorn Learning, a ﬁrm focused on delivering leadership skills training in the ﬂow of work.

Copyright © 2023 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

8

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.