# The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at: https://www.emerald.com/insight/0951-354X.htm

Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors in higher education: does organizational learning mediate the relationship? Mohammed Aboramadan Department of Economics, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy Khalid Abed Dahleez Management, A’Sharqiyah University, Ibra, Oman and Management, Islamic University of Gaza, Gaza, Palestinian Authority, and Caterina Farao Department of Economics, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy

Abstract Purpose–Buildingonsocialexchangetheoryandrelationalleadershiptheory,thispaperproposesamodelof inclusive leadership in higher education institutions. Together with an attempt to examine the impact of inclusive leadership on extra-role behaviors of academic staff, the paper aims to test the intervening mechanism of organizational learning among the aforementioned relationships. Design/methodology/approach – Data were collected from 227 academic staff working in the Palestinian higher education institutions. Partial least squares (PLS-SEM) analysis technique was utilized to examine the hypotheses. Findings – The findings reveal that inclusive leadership exerts a positive effect on extra-role behaviors (organizational citizenship behaviors and innovative work behaviors) in the Palestinian higher education setting. Moreover, the findings show that organizational learning plays a significant mediatingrole among the relationships examined Practical implications – Academic communities are increasingly diverse. This diversity requires a work environment in which employees take on additional work roles. In response to this diversity, managers of highereducationinstitutionsshouldbeconcernedabouttherolesandpracticesofinclusiveleaders.Inaddition, higher education institutions need to be learning organizations since this would help to mitigate this diversity and create a working atmosphere characterized by continuous learning, collaboration and dialogue. Originality/value – In higher education, most of the literature on inclusive academic leadership is mainly theoretical.Furthermore,organizationallearninginhighereducationresearchisbasedonanecdotalperspectives (Dee and Lei(cid:1)syte, 2016). To this end, this paper is novel, as it is one of few studies to empirically investigate inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors via organizational learning in a non-western academic context. Keywords Inclusive leadership, Organizational learning, OCB, Innovative work behavior Paper type Research paper

Introduction Academic leadership in higher education organizations encounters significant challenges which require rethinking and renewing traditional management, organizational policies and

© Mohammed Aboramadan, Khalid Abed Dahleez and Caterina Farao. Published by Emerald Publishing Limited. This article is published under the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) licence. Anyone may reproduce, distribute, translate and create derivative works of this article (for both commercial and non-commercial purposes), subject to full attribution to the original publication and authors. The full terms of this licence may be seen at http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0/ legalcode

This paper forms part of a special section “Inclusive higher education in cross-cultural settings”,

## guest edited by Anugamini Srivastava, Sucheta Agarwal and Malini Ganapathy.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

397

## Received 5 June 2020 Revised 6 October 2020 Accepted 23 November 2020

International Journal of Educational Management Vol. 36 No. 4, 2022 pp. 397-418 Emerald Publishing Limited 0951-354X DOI 10.1108/IJEM-06-2020-0290

# IJEM 36,4

398

practices(Bolton,1996;Gigliotti,2017;StefaniandBlessinger,2017;StratheandWilson,2006; Temple and Ylitalo, 2009). However, in light of these challenges, efforts to reform higher education management and leadership practices have mostly failed, while more innovative strategies have been devoted to prevail over the conventional management model (van Ameijde et al., 2009; Senge, 2010; Temple and Ylitalo, 2009). In general, transforming the conventional approaches to inclusive management needs fostering successful collaboration, andtheroleofmiddle-levelacademicleadersmustbehighlightedwithverynewdemandsput on their regular practices (Henkel, 2002; Temple and Ylitalo, 2009), in order to encourage positive work-related outcomes among academic staff. These demands require adapting to academic diversity and ensuring academic quality and effectiveness in which middle-level supervisors must behave as managers of their department and at the same time display effective leadership behaviors (Evans and Chun 2015). As the academic community are more diverse thanever, anotherchallenge for middle-level academic leaders istodevelop academic leadership identities, roles and competencies at various university levels to manage this diversity (Stefani and Blessinger, 2017; Temple and Ylitalo, 2009). Furthermore, this requires middle-level managers to balance inclusion demands and classical academic freedom in a situation in which the concept of modern inclusive leadership academic setting is still underdeveloped (Stefani and Blessinger, 2017). In general, previous researchers have suggested that practicing inclusive leadership in higher education to manage diversity faces the obstacle of the lack of effective leadership in the organizational culture and especially at the departmental level (Evans and Chun 2015). Therefore, new academic leadership practices shouldbefollowedinordertoincorporatethestrengthsofcollegialpracticesintoamorepost- modern concept of relational and inclusive leadership (Stefani and Blessinger, 2017). Although different types of leadership in higher education were studied such as servant leadership (Aboramadan et al., 2020a, b); transformational leadership (Owusu-Agyeman, 2019) and ethical leadership (Zeng and Xu, 2020), inclusive leadership in higher education seemstobethemosteffectivestyletomanagediversity(StefaniandBlessinger,2017;Temple and Ylitalo, 2009). Inclusive leadership can be viewed as a collaborative mechanism through which organizational members effectively take on leading roles and actions (McCauley and Van Velsor, 2004). In this leadership style, inclusive leaders eliminate obstacles, fortify relationships with others, support everyone to feel involved, and ensure that everyone get a fair opportunity to influence policies, decisions and procedures (Ryan, 2006). As leadership has implications for various stakeholders, an inclusive leader serves as the gateway to cross- cultural partnerships, procedures and policies. The inclusive leader calls upon various stakeholders to work together, in order to overcome conflicts and push policies forward (StefaniandBlessinger,2017).Previousresearchinhumanresourcesmanagementsuggested that leadership is a very important key to encourage organizational inclusiveness (Ashikali et al., 2020; Ashikali and Groeneveld, 2015; Brimhall, 2021), yet the legitimate question is whether the inclusive leader contributes to enhancing outcomes at the individual levels in academic settings.

On a different note, together with the concept of inclusive leadership, higher education institutions can respond to their challenges through promoting an environment which is characterized by organizational learning (Kezar and Holcombe, 2020; Salas-Vallina et al., 2017). Recent research endeavors suggest that higher education organizations need to be learning organizations, to facilitate change in the academic arena (Mulford, 2005; Strandli, 2006; White and Weathersby, 2005). Leaders, professors and administrators can employ learning theories to encourage change, to foster the effectiveness and organizational utilization of information within decision-making processes and to formulate and execute strategies to maximize institutional effectiveness (Dee and Lei(cid:1)syt_e, 2016).

Given the previous discussion, our study aims at proposing a model of the effects of inclusive leadership on academics’ extra-role behaviors, where organizational learning is

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

hypothesized to serve as an effective intervening mechanism through data collected from academic staff working at the Palestinian higher education institutions. Our research contributestotheliteratureinfiveways.First,althoughtheavailableliteraturedemonstrates that inclusive leadership depicts a positive relationship with employees’ innovative behaviors, creativity, work engagement, well-being and voice behaviors (Carmeli et al., 2010; Choi et al., 2015, 2017; Guo et al., 2020; Javed et al., 2018, 2019; Qi and Liu, 2017), there is no evidence about the effect of inclusive leadership on innovative work behavior and organizational citizenship behavior simultaneously in the inclusion and leadership literature. Second,thisisoneoftheveryfewempiricalstudieswhichempiricallyexamine theconceptof inclusive leadership of academic leaders in higher education. It has been argued that the scope of inclusive leadership in higher education is not well studied (Stefani and Blessinger, 2017). Third, this paper contributes to the inclusion literature as inclusion research is still in infancy stage (Mitchell et al., 2015). More specifically limited empirical research has been conducted on the consequences of inclusive leadership (Choi et al., 2015; Najmaei and Sadeghinejad, 2019). Relational leadership styles, including inclusive leadership, are not well studiedintermsoftheireffectsonpositivework-relatedoutcomesamongemployees(Carmeli et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2016). Shore et al. (2018) in their review of inclusive workplaces addressed the need to study employees’ perceptions of their inclusive leaders and the impact ofthis inclusivenessonwork-relatedoutcomes. Fourth, thestudycontributestotheliterature of organizational learning in general and academic setting in specific. Research on organizational learning in higher education organizations is scarce (Voolaid and Ehrlich, 2017), and the existing literature demonstrates that there is a dearth of research on how organizationallearningasacontextualfactormayincreaseextra-rolebehaviors,especiallyin knowledge-intensive settings (Salas-Vallina et al., 2017). Finally, this study shed lights on the roleinclusiveleadershipplaysinservicesectors,especiallyhighereducation,inanonwestern context (Palestine).

The palestinian higher education context The academic community at Palestinian higher education institutions is remarkably diverse. According to Palestinian Center Bureau of Statistics (2019), the academic community working at the Palestinian higher education is characterized by unique demographic characteristics such as age (young and old), gender (males and females), inter-regional movements, different religion (Muslims and Christians) and diverse philosophical backgrounds due to academic members’ educational degrees obtained from diverse cultural contexts (USA–UK, EU, others). Previous studies in the higher education setting in Palestine showed that the demographic profile is diverse in terms of age, gender and experience (Aboramadan, 2020; Dahleez et al., 2020). Furthermore, the agenda of ministry of higher education in Palestine is directed towards developing inclusion-oriented human resources in higher education through recruiting and training academic staff with skills, theoretical knowledge and competencies to ensure an inclusive climate at the workplace. On the other hand, higher education institutions in Palestine encounter financial challenges and operate in an environment that is characterized by political instability and ambiguity (Dahleez et al., 2020; Moughrabi, 2015).

SincePalestinianuniversitiesareconsidered politicalenvironments characterizedbyhigh diversity and limited resources, the ideals of inclusion cannot be implemented without the presence of leaders who are willing to change. Accordingly, the role of the academic leader in the Palestinian context is to invite diverse academic staff in order to address diversity differences and to collaborate together to move policies forward to continually expand the sector capacity in response to the challenges it encounters as suggested by Senge (2010). Although leadership in the Palestinian academic setting seems to be dominated by the

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

399

# IJEM 36,4

presence of servant leaders as suggested in previous studies (i.e. Aboramadan et al., 2020a, b; Dahleezetal.,2020),theauthorsbelievethatfutureacademicleadershipneedstobeinclusive, inspiring and purposive in order to enable the higher education institutions to keep functioning and encourage academic staff to display extra-role behaviors to overcome the challenges encountered. In addition, inclusive leadership featured by dialogic approach will bringconsiderablepracticalandintellectualvaluetothecontinuousgrowthofthePalestinian academic institutions.

400

Theoretical background and hypotheses formulation Inclusive leadership and OCB Komives et al. (2013), in their model, introduced five relational leadership types: inclusive, ethical, empowering, purposeful and process-oriented leadership. While empowering leaders provide employees the opportunity to be part of the decision making through empowering them, ethical leaders are driven by values while leading others, purposeful leaders have commitment toward achieving goals, process-focused leaders manage groups process through a system perspective (Komives et al., 2013) and inclusive leaders demonstrate openness, inclusiveness, accessibility and interactive communications with employees (Carmeli et al., 2010). Similarly, Hollander (2009) has mentioned that the focus of inclusive leaders is to listen and pay attention to employees’ needs and to transmit the feeling to employees that the leader is available to them. In different terms, inclusive leadership is characterized bycontinuous support tofollowers, opencommunication, providingassistance and help and showing concern for others’ interests (Carmeli et al., 2010; Hollander, 2009).

In contrast with many other types of leadership which may be conceptually connected, inclusive leadership possess a distinct style of recognition, belonging, inclusiveness and identity (Randel et al., 2018). Inclusive leaders are more concerned with their followers’ needs and interests (Hollander, 2009). While transformational leadership is oriented toward developing and motivating followers toward achieving the goals of the organization (Dvir et al., 2002), inclusive leadership emphasizes on embracing followers for who they are, enablingthemtoapplytheirspecifictalentsandskillsandempoweringthemtoparticipatein daily organizational activities. Furthermore, although servant leadership is dedicated to enablingfollowers togrowand develop(Lidenet al., 2008),inclusive leadership iscentered on the followers’ needs for availability and openness. Empowering leadership is characterized by example-based leadership, authority’ sharing, coaching and mentoring (Srivastava et al., 2006), whereas inclusive leadership promotes the sense of inclusiveness, access, openness and quality. Given the previous discussion, there is a minimum overlap between inclusive leadership and other existing forms of leadership. This implies that the other forms of existing conceptualizations of leadership do not completely articulate and capture the core concepts of inclusive leadership (Randel et al., 2018).

Organizational citizenship behavior (OCB)is a discretionary behavior, neither written in a contract as part of the employee’s responsibilities nor recognized in formal reward schemes (Alge et al., 2006; Organ, 1990; Xerri and Brunetto, 2013). In general, employees who display OCB perform beyond what is required from them (Danish et al., 2014). According to Organ (1988), OCB has five dimensions: conscientiousness (going beyond the least required), altruism, (assisting others with their tasks), civic virtue (the ability to become involved in organizational life), sportsmanship (broad-minded behavior in undesirable situations) and courtesy (efforts exerted to avoid problems related to working with others). Although OCB has been demonstrated to be positively related to lower turnover intentions, higher job performance and elevated levels of job satisfaction, the topic has not received great attention from researchers into higher education organizations (Bauwens et al., 2019). Among the few studies, Wilkins et al. (2018) found that organizational identification positively influences

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

OCB within UK university campuses. In addition, Bauwens et al. (2019) found that performance fairness is positively related to OCB among academic staff in Belgium. Lawrence et al. (2012) found that some job characteristics affect the OCB of academic staff hired within a state higher education institution. Panicker et al. (2018) discovered that an inclusive workplace and OCB are positively correlated in a higher education setting. Finally,AdewaleandGhavifekr(2019)foundthatOCBamongNigerianlecturersispositively impacted by leadership self-efficacy.

As leadership is perceived to be a common antecedent to OCB (Podsakoff et al., 2000), the authors predict that inclusive leadership may yield positive effects on academics’ OCB for two reasons. First, building on social exchange theory, known as “SET”, (Blau, 1964), it is believed that when followers perceive the supportive behaviors of their inclusive leader, this will motivate them to repay the leader and the organization through showing positive behaviors (Wang, 2008). The displaying of OCB among employees is one of the ways to reciprocate (Organ, 1988). This issupported by Liu (2009), who has argued that good support from a leader is fundamental to the development of extra-role behaviors. Second, the links between inclusive leadership and followers’ OCB can be explained by the relational leadership theory (Hollander, 1964), which addresses leadership as “a shared experience, a voyage through time” and the leader is not a sole voyager, he also says that “a major component of the leader–follower relationship is the leader’s perception of his or her self- relative to followers, and how they in turn perceive the leader” (p. 55). Therefore, the behaviors of helping and being available of inclusive leaders will then be perceived as role model behaviors by employees, which in turn will encourage them to display the same supportive behaviors to their colleagues (Carmeli et al., 2010). Empirically, Tran and Choi (2019) uncovered a positive link between inclusive leadership and OCB among service workers in Vietnam. To this end, the following hypothesis is posited:

H1.

Inclusive leadership is positively associated with academics’ OCB.

Inclusive leadership and IWB Innovative workbehavior(IWB) reflectsinnovationbehaviorswhich occurindifferentphases: the first phase is when employees explore and generate novel ideals and solutions (Amabile etal.,1996;XerriandBrunetto,2013).Thesecondphaseisrelatedtoideachampioning,inwhich employees try to secure others’ support for their ideas (Dorenbosch et al., 2005). In the final phase, employees try to implement these ideas, with the aim of benefiting the organization (De Jong and Den Hartog, 2010). IWB is a risk-bearing, nonroutine behavior in which followers try to avoid classical ways of thinking (Kesselet al., 2012). Despite the fact that research on IWB is verylimitedinthehighereducationcontext,someendeavorshaveattemptedtoinvestigatethe effect of ethical work and social capital on IWB among Pakistani teachers in higher education (ShahabandImran,2018)andtoexaminetheimpactofpsychologicalempowermentonIWBof lecturers in Malaysian polytechnics (Ghani and Jusoff, 2009).

On another note, leadership has been regarded as a change agent in organizations (Amabile, 2013; Krause, 2004) and has been found to play a significant role in cultivating employees’ IWB(Afsaretal., 2014;Karatepe etal., 2020;ScottandBruce, 1994).Basedon this, the authors predict that inclusive leadership supportive behaviors would positively contribute to IWB for the following reasons. First, when inclusive leaders pay attention to thefeelingsandinterestsoftheiremployees(Javedetal.,2019),employeesshowhighlevelsof energyandcommitmenttotheirleadersandthusaremorelikelytopayback,exhibitingIWB (Piccoloetal., 2010;Walumbwaetal., 2011). Thiscorresponds towhat hasbeenfound inSET, in which employees feel the need to reciprocate by engaging in innovative behaviors in exchange for the supportive behaviors demonstrated by their leaders (Yeh-Yun Lin and Liu, 2012). Furthermore, the relational leadership theory of Hollander (1964) implies that the

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

401

# IJEM 36,4

relationship between the leader and the member is a two-way influence in which there are social exchangeable transactions between the leader and the member. Hence, when inclusive leaders show support and availability (Ashikali et al., 2020; Ryan, 2006), this will motivate followers to engage in innovative behaviors (Altuno(cid:3)glu and Bulgurcu G€urel, 2015; Carmeli etal.,2010).Empirically,anumberofstudiesfoundthatinclusiveleadershippositivelyaffects IWB (Javed et al., 2018, 2019; Qi et al., 2019). Given the above discussion, the following hypothesis can be posited:

402

H2.

Inclusive leadership is positively associated with academics’ IWB.

Inclusive leadership and organizational learning According to Garvin (1993), organizational learning refers to the process through which organizations create, acquire and transfer knowledge to reflect new knowledge and ideas. A innovation and learning organization is characterized by teamwork, cooperation, information-based processes (Confessore and Kops, 1998). According to Marsick and Watkins (2003), a learning organization has seven dimensions: “continuous learning, inquiry and dialogue, collaboration and team learning, people empowerment for the people dimension, environmental connection, embedded systems, and strategic leadership”. Jensen (2005) has recently underlined the importance of the learning organization because of its capacitytocreateknowledgethroughmotivatingemployeestotransferinformationintonew knowledge. In general, research on learning organization in higher education institutions is limited (Voolaid and Ehrlich, 2017), and the area of examining the relationship between organizational learning and work-associated factors in higher education institutions has not yet been addressed (Dee and Lei(cid:1)syt_e, 2016; Voolaid and Ehrlich, 2017). Notably, few studies have employed organizational learning as a theoretical foundation to generate novel empirical work in a higher education context (Dee and Lei(cid:1)syt_e, 2016).

Concerning the association between inclusive leadership and organization learning, the authors predict that leadership inclusiveness positively contributes to organizational learning. Because the inclusive leader is open to listening to followers’ feedbacks and inputs, this generates a feeling among followers that the leader appreciates discussion and information sharing (Tran and Choi, 2019). Hence, when the leader offers an opportunity for the expression of ideas and views, this encourages followers to speed up their knowledge acquisition and dissemination (Zagor(cid:1)sek et al., 2009). Furthermore, the availability of the leader to assist and support others motivates followers to enhance their dedication to continuous learning (Choi et al., 2015). Consequently, inclusive leaders create an atmosphere in which followers can learn and develop their qualities (Najmaei and Sadeghinejad, 2019). Finally, an easily accessible leader facilitates more interactions with followers, and encourages a learning-focused environment (Real et al., 2014).

Empirically, few studies have established a positive relationship between leadership and organizational learning. For instance, Tran and Choi (2019) found that inclusive leaders positively influenceacultureoforganizational learninginVietnamesefirms.Intheeducation setting, Hsiao and Chang (2011) found that transformational leadership positively impacts learning in Taiwanese post-secondary education. Hence, the following organizational hypothesis can be formulated:

H3.

Inclusive leadership is positively associated with organizational academic settings.

# learning in

Organizational learning, OCB and IWB Bhaskar and Mishra (2017) established positive links between organizational learning and both financial performance and knowledge performance. Awasthy and Gupta (2012) found

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

that the people-level learning dimension of organizational learning has a positive impact on performance outcomes in India. Furthermore, Siddique (2018) revealed that the effect of organizational learning on business performance was positive in UAE. On the other hand, learning may contribute to encouraging Jo and Joo (2011) found that organizational employees to go beyond what is required of them, and to assisting their colleagues in conditions where the performance of an organization is threatened. Departing from this it seems that organization learning may foster followers’ OCB because it argument, encourages thinking strategically, which enables employees to widen their perspectives and toachievemorethanmerelyanindividualrole(Senge,2010).Indeed,SETprovidesabasisfor this argument since followers display discretionary behaviors when they positively perceive organizational resources (Aboramadan and Dahleez, 2020). This was confirmed by previous studies which found that learning organization was positively associated with innovative (cid:1) Skerlavaj et al., 2010). Hsiao and Chang (2011) found that cultures in Korean firms ( organizational learning influences innovation in Taiwan. In addition, Amabile et al. (1996) highlighted the important role organizational resources play in fostering innovation at both organizationalandindividuallevels.Giventhisdiscussion, theauthorsproposethefollowing hypotheses:

H4. Organizational learning is positively associated with academics’ OCB. H5. Organizational learning is positively associated with academics’ IWB.

Mediating role of organizational learning Under the umbrella of SET and relational leadership theory, followers tend to reciprocate to the inclusive leader (because of the supportive behavior) and the organization (because of the organizationalsupport)throughdisplayingextra-rolebehaviorssuchasOCBandIWB.Open andaccessibleleadersencouragealearning-orientedworkenvironment(Choietal.,2015),and in return this will create a knowledge sharing and learning atmosphere (Yang et al., 2004), perceived by employees as organizational support, which would, eventually, stimulate them to repay the organization by going beyond expectations (Aryee et al., 2002). This suggests that organizational learning may play an intervening role in the relationship between leader inclusiveness and extra-role behaviors. Empirically, Hsiao and Chang (2011) found that organizational learning significantly mediates the relationship between transformational leadership and organizational innovation. Given this train of thoughts, the authors posit the following hypothesis:

H6. The relationship between inclusive leadership and (a) academics’ OCB and (b)

academics’ IWB is positively mediated by organizational learning.

Research model The purpose of the study is to propose a model of the influence of inclusive leadership in the Palestinian higher education institutions on extra-role behaviors of academic staff. Organizational learning is theorized to serve as an intervening mechanism among the aforesaid links as presented in Figure 1.

Methods Procedures and participants Our data were collected from the academic staff working in Palestinian universities. Academic staff (Professors) were approached by the researcher to obtain their agreement to participate in the study. Of 432 questionnaires distributed, 227 were returned and were useablefor statisticalanalysis,representing aresponserateof(52.54%).Questionnaires were

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

403

# IJEM 36,4

## Inclusive leadership: A relational leadership style for higher education

## Work environment: Organizational learning

# Extra-role behaviors: Organizational citizenship behavior and innovative Work behavior

404

H1+

# Organizational Citizenship Behavior

H4+

# Inclusive Leadership

H3+

# Mediator

# Organizational Learning (H6a, H6b)

H5+

H2+

# Innovative Work Behavior

# Figure 1. Research model

distributed and collected through a drop-off and pick-up method, with a two-week time lag. Initially, participants filled in the part related to inclusive leadership and organizational learning. The questionnaires were collected, and after two weeks, the respondents received their questionnaires back and completed the extra-role behavior questions. The questionnaire was translated from English to Arabic using the back-translation technique (Brislin, 1986).

Thequestionnairewentthroughapilotstudywithfourteenacademicstaff,toevaluatethe questionnaire before distributing it. Some comments and remarks were made and were considered. Thefirstpageofthequestionnaire includedacoverletter,whereit wasexplained the objectives of the study, provided an overview of the study variables and explained why this research is important for both the academic community and policymakers. All respondents were assured that their personal information would not be shared.

Concerning the demographics of the respondents, of the 227 respondents, 199 were males. The average age of theacademic staff was 41.5 years, with eight years’ experience in academia. The respondents were working in business colleges (20%), medical schools (10%), art and literature (30%), natural science (25%), engineering (5%) and languages (10%).

Measures Scales of inclusive leadership, innovative work behavior and organizational citizenship behavior were assessed using a seven-point Likert scale, where 1 indicates absolute disagreement and 7 indicates absolute agreement, whereas organizational learning was assessed by asking respondents to evaluate how good organizational learning dimensions are in their organizations on a 7-point Likert-type scale which ranged from “very bad ” to “excellent”.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

Inclusive leadership. This construct was measured with nine-item scale from Carmeli et al. (2010) to assess the inclusive leadership of the deans who supervise academic staff. A sample item is “My supervisor is open to hearing new ideas”. The alpha reliability for this construct was 0.917.

Organizational learning. This construct was measured using seven items borrowed from Yang et al. (2004). These items represent the shortened version of the organizational learning dimensions. These were: continuous learning, team learning, empowerment, embedded system, system connection and strategic leadership. Previous research has utilized these items and reported good reliability (Joo and Shim, 2010; Tran and Choi, 2019). The alpha reliability for this construct was 0.894.

inquiry and dialog,

IWB. This construct was measured using a six-item scale from Scott and Bruce (1994). Althoughthisscalewasdesignedfortheassessmentofemployees’IWBbytheirsupervisors, employees assessed this scale themselves. This is consistent with previous studies (Cai et al., 2018; Montani et al., 2014). A sample item is “I generate creative ideas”. The alpha reliability for this construct was 0.882.

OCB.ThiswasmeasuredusingsixitemsborrowedfromWilliamsandAnderson(1991).A sample item is “I go out of my way to help new co-workers”. The alpha reliability for this construct was 0.886.

Control variables. following prior research (Shin and Zhou, 2003; Tran and Choi, 2019), the

authors have controlled for gender, age and experience.

Statistical analysis strategy Descriptive statistics, reliability measures and correlations were analyzed using SPSS v.24. To test the study hypotheses, the authors have utilized partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) (Hair et al., 2016). The authors utilized PLS-SEM as it has been widely used in different scientific disciplines, such as hospitality, human resource management, marketing and strategic management (Ali et al., 2018; Hair et al., 2011, 2012; Ringle et al., 2020). PLS-SEM technique measures the path coefficients through the ordinary least squares (Rigdon, 2012, 2016). Moreover, PLS-SEM deals with ordinal measures and correlated measurement errors (Rademaker et al., 2019; Schuberth et al., 2018), handles more outcome variables than classical regression techniques especially when the sample size is relatively small (Hair et al., 2012) and provides predictive accuracy when data do not follow a normal distribution pattern. In this study, 5000 sample bias-corrected bootstrapping technique with 95% confidence interval was utilized to check for the mediation effects.

Common method bias Commonmethodbiaswasassessedusingtwotechniques.First,theHarmansinglefactortest was employed. The results of the test generated four factors which did not load on a single factor, and the general factor did not explain the majority of variance (34.55%), which is below the suggested cutoff point of 50%. Another technique used was to evaluate the inner variance inflation factors using the PLS-SEM method. The results showed that the values of VIF ranged from 1.0 to 1.197, suggesting that there was no multicollinearity (Kutner et al., 2004) and that the data are not contaminated by common method bias. According to Kock (2015), if VIF are lower than 3.3, this indicates that the data are free of common method bias.

Results Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and the correlations between the examined variables. The values of the descriptive statistics were as follows: inclusive leadership learning (Mean 5 3.732, SD: 0.851), IWB (Mean 5 4.174, SD: 0.88), organizational

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

405

# IJEM 36,4

# r e d n e G

0 0 0 1

.

406

e c n e i r e p x E

0 0 0 1

.

- * 6 3 2 0 (cid:1) .

e g A

0 0 0 1

.

- * 5 1 7 0 .

- * 9 2 3 0 (cid:1) .

# B C O

) 2 5 7 0 (

.

- 7 1 1 0 .

9 4 0 0

.

- 4 2 1 0 (cid:1) .

# B W

# I

) 3 4 7 0 (

.

- * 3 3 5 0 .

6 7 0 0

.

6 5 0 0 (cid:1)

.

- 5 4 1 0 (cid:1) .

# L O

) 9 3 7 0 (

.

- * 1 6 3 0 .

- * 6 5 5 0 .

4 3 0 0

.

2 8 0 0 (cid:1)

.

5 1 0 0 (cid:1)

.

# L I

) 1 4 7 0 (

.

- * 0 5 4 0 .

- * 0 9 3 0 .

- * 3 6 4 0 .

0 6 0 0 (cid:1)

.

- 3 5 1 0 (cid:1) .

7 8 0 0

.

. )

d e l i a t - 2 (

. )

d e l i a t - 2 (

# D S

0 8 8 0

.

1 5 8 0

.

4 1 9 0

.

4 5 8 0

.

1 4 7 0

.

0 8 9 0

.

0 3 3 0

.

# l e v e l

1 0 0

.

# l e v e l

5 0 0

.

# n a e M

4 7 1 4

.

2 3 7 3

.

0 9 1 4

.

1 7 0 4

.

0 3 9 2

.

0 5 1 3

.

0 2 1 1

.

# e h t

# t a

t n a c i f i n g i s

# e h t

# t a

t n a c i f i n g i s

# Table 1. Descriptive statistics, correlations, Fornell- Larcker criterion in the diagonal

# s t c u r t s n o C

# L N

# I

# L R O

# B W

# I

# B C O

e g A

e c n e i r e p x E

# r e d n e G

7 2 2

.

# N

# : ) s ( e t o N

# s i

n o i t a l e r r o C * *

# s i

n o i t a l e r r o C *

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

r o i v a h e b

p h s n e z i t i c

# i

l a n o i t a z i n a g r O

# B C O

; r o i v a h e b k r o w e v i t a v o n n I

# B W

# I

;

# g n n r a e l

# i

l a n o i t a z i n a g r O

:

# L R O

p h s r e d a e l

# i

e v i s u l c n I

:

# L N

# I

# s e u l a v

l a c i r o g e t a c

# o t

s u o u n i t n o c m o r f d e r e f s n a r t

e r e w e c n e i r e p x e

d n a

e g a

# f o

# s e u l a V

(Mean 5 4.19, SD: 0.914) and OCB (Mean 5 4.071, SD: 0.854). Significant correlations were found between inclusive leadership, organizational learning, IWB and OCB. The reported correlations were: inclusive leadership and IWB (r 5 0.390, p 5 0.000), inclusive leadership and OCB (r 5 0.463, p 5 0.000), inclusive leadership and organizational learning (r 5 0.450, p 5 0.000), organizational learning and IWB (r 5 0.361, p 5 0.000) and organizational learning and OCB (r 5 0.556, p 5 0.000). The results reveal that significant and positive relationships exist between the examined variables in this study.

Assessing the PLS-SEM model Factorloadingsweremeasuredtochecktheinternalconsistencyoftheitems.Table2showed that all items had a loading higher than 0.7 (Hair et al., 2016). Moreover, both the average variance extracted and the composite reliability were calculated for all constructs (Fornell and Larcker, 1981). The values of the AVEs and CRs were higher than 0.5 and 0.7, respectively, following the assertions of Fornell and Larcker (1981). Based on these findings, the constructs in our hypothesized model were reliable and consistent. Discriminant validity was assessed, using the Fornell and Larcker (1981) technique. This technique includes calculating the square root of the average variance extracted and comparing it with associations between the examined variables. The results in Table 1 show that the discriminant validity was met, as all the square roots of the AVEs were greater than the correlations within the latent variables. In order to provide another evidence of the discriminant validity, the heterotrait-monotrait ratio (HTMT) was calculated. Results in Table 3 indicated that HTMT ratios were smaller than 0.85, following the suggestions recommend by Hulland (1999). Therefore, we can say that discriminant validity condition wasmetinthisstudy.Finally,thepredictiverelevance(Stone–Geisser’sQ2)wasestimatedfor theresearchvariables.TheQ2valueswere(0.097)fororganizationallearning,(0.097)forIWB and (0.187) for OCB. The Stone–Geisser’s Q2 values were larger than 0, which suggests predictive relevance as recommended by Hair et al. (2016).

Assessing the structural model: quality criteria R2 and f2 values were calculated to assess the structural model. The calculated values of R2 were acceptable, following the recommendation of (Hair et al., 2019). Organizational learning hadR2valueof0.260,IWBhadR2valueof0.271andOCBhadR2valueof0.396.Accordingto Hair et al. (2019) values between 0.25 and 0.50 are considered moderate, while values between 0.50 and 0.75 are considered substantial. Hair et al. (2019) suggested as well that even less than10%orlowervalueoftheR2canbeconsideredsatisfactoryanddependsontheresearch context.

Moreover, the reported effect size f2 were: inclusive leadership on organizational learning (0.197), organizational learning on IWB (0.047), organizational learning on OCB (0.183), inclusive leadership on IWB (0.073) and inclusive leadership on OCB (0.083).

Hypotheses testing Figure 2 and Table 4 show the results of the direct and mediating effects. The results indicated that inclusive leadership exerted a positive impact on both OCB (β 5 0.269, p50.000)andIWB(β50.287,p50.001).Inclusiveleadershipwasalsofoundtobepositively relatedtoorganizationallearning(β50.449,p50.000).Organizationallearningwasfoundto exert a positive effect on OCB (β 5 0.436, p 5 0.000) and IWB (β 5 0.232, p 5 0.003). The results lend support for H1, H2, H3, H4, H5.

To test the mediating effect, the authors calculated the indirect effects using the 5000- bootstrappingmethod,followingthesuggestionsofHairetal.(2016).Theresultsshowedthat

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

407

# IJEM 36,4

# Items

# Loading

408

# Inclusive leadership

# Organizational learning

# Innovative work behavior

# Organizational citizenship behavior

The supervisor is open to hearing new ideas The supervisor is attentive to new opportunities to improve work processes The supervisor is open to discuss the desired goals and new ways to achieve them The supervisor is available for consultation on problems The supervisor is an ongoing “presence” in this team-someone who is readily available The supervisor is available for professional questions I would like to consult with him/her The supervisor is ready to listen to my requests The supervisor encourages me to access him/her on emerging issues The supervisor is accessible for discussing emerging problems Continuous learning Inquiry and dialog Team learning Empowerment Embedded system System connection Strategic leadership I search out new technologies, processes, techniques and/or product ideas I generate creative ideas I promote and champion ideas to others I investigate and secure funds needed to implement new ideas I develop adequate plans and schedule for the implementation of new ideas I consider myself innovative I help my co-workers when their workload is heavy I help my co-workers who have been absent to finish their work I take time to listen to my co-workers’ problems and worries I go out of my way to help new co- workers I take personal interest in my co- workers I pass along notices and news to my co-workers

0.767***

0.772***

0.787***

0.725***

0.802***

0.795***

0.753***

0.778***

0.791***

0.746*** 0.806*** 0.781*** 0.813*** 0.807*** 0.757*** 0.765*** 0.810***

0.744*** 0.768***

0.835***

0.768***

0.824*** 0.815***

0.803***

0.806***

0.797***

0.820***

# Table 2. Loadings, AVEs and CRs

# Note(s): *** significant at 0.001

0.749***

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

# T Statistics (jO/STDEVj)

10.646

8.360

12.242

8.241

11.812

10.333

8.166

10.670

8.944

8.336 9.790 10.950 12.711 12.457 8.892 12.436 12.752

6.559 8.648

12.447

8.073

13.387 15.240

12.307

12.639

13.488

17.496

10.553

# CR

0.931

0.917

0.910

0.914

# AVE

0.600

0.612

0.627

0.638

organizational learning positively and significantly mediated the relationship between inclusive leadership and OCB (β 5 0.196, p 5 0.000) and between inclusive leadership and IWB (β 5 0.104, p 5 0.007). These results provide support for the H6a and H6b, suggesting that organizational learning was a significant intervening mechanism between inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors. Finally, our control variables were not significant in the model.

Discussion As one of the few studies, within higher education, to investigate the impact of inclusive leadership on both OCB and IWB, the study enriches the extant literature on both inclusive

# Constructs

# INL

# ORL

# IWB

# INL ORL IWB OCB

0.444 0.381 0.463

0.353 0.553

0.526

## Inclusive leadership: A relational leadership style for higher education

## Work environment: Organizational learning

# Extra-role behaviors: Organizational citizenship behavior and innovtive work behavior

β = 0.269***

# Organizational Citizenship Behavior

β = 0.436***

R² = 0.396

# Inclusive Leadership

β = 0.449***

# Mediator

# Organizational Learning

R² = 0.260

β = 0.232**

β = 0.287**

# Innovative Work Behavior

R² = 0.271

# Mediating Effects

# INL

ORL OCB (

β = 0.196***

, t = 5.370)

# INL

ORL IWB (

β = 0.104**

, t = 2.678)

# Note(s):

## *** significant at 0.001 level ** significant at 0.01 level

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

# OCB

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

409

# Table 3. HTMT ratio

# Figure 2. Model with estimates

# IJEM 36,4

Standardized coefficient

# T statistics

# Lower Bound

# Upper Bound

410

Direct effects INL → ORL INL → IWB INL → OCB ORL → IWB ORL → OCB

0.449 0.287 0.269 0.232 0.436

8.518 3.444 4.336 2.998 6.894

0.349 0.129 0.149 0.076 0.312

0.557 0.454 0.388 0.382 0.556

## Indirect effects INL → ORL → IWB INL → ORL → OCB

0.104 0.196

2.678 5.370

0.031 0.130

0.185 0.273

## Table 4. Direct, Indirect, and Total effects

# Total effects INL → IWB INL → OCB

0.391 0.465

5.729 8.832

0.259 0.362

0.528 0.569

leadership and extra-role behaviors. On the one hand, the results of our study found that inclusive leadership exerts a positive impact on academics’ OCB. The results are confirmed by previous studies in the private sector which suggested that inclusive leaders’ behaviors positively contribute to followers’ discretionary behaviors in the workplace (Carmeli et al., 2010). On the other hand, the results found that inclusive leadership demonstrates a positive relationship with academics’ IWB. These results were also consistent with previous business studies examining the leadership-innovative work behavior relationship (Javed et al., 2018; Qi et al., 2019). This suggests that the supportive behaviors of the leader encourage employees’ voluntary behaviors and enhance the innovation behaviors generated by employees. Given these results, our study provides strong evidence of the effectiveness of SETandrelationalleadershiptheoryinexplaininghowleadershipcanencourageemployees’ positive behaviors and outcomes due to the social exchanges between the leader and the follower. The results also suggest that inclusive leadership and organizational learning were positively associated. These results were in line with previous empirical evidence (Hsiao and Chang, 2011; Tran and Choi, 2019), which found that leader openness and support would create a culture of organizational learning, due to information sharing and the provision of continuous learning opportunities. Inaddition, our results found that organizational learning was positively related to OCB and IWB. These results were consistent with prior studies in (cid:1) Skerlavaj et al., 2010; Tran and Choi, 2019). This implies that the existence business settings ( ofalearningenvironmentwillbepositivelyperceivedbyemployeesandhencemotivatethem to demonstrate extra-role behaviors.

Finally, the study uncovered the role organizational learning can play as an intervening mechanism in the relationship between inclusive leadership and academics’ discretionary behaviors in higher education. Our results found that the relationship between inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors is not straightforward, and organizational learning significantly mediated the relationship between inclusive leadership and both IWB and OCB.

Theoretical and practical implications Ourstudyrespondedtothedifferentcallsmadetoexaminetheconceptofinclusioningeneral (Mitchell et al., 2015) and inclusive leadership in academic setting in particular (Stefani and Blessinger, 2017; Temple and Ylitalo, 2009). In addition, the study contributed to the limited body of literature of organizational learning in higher education (Dee and Lei(cid:1)syt_e, 2016; Voolaid and Ehrlich, 2017), by examining its potential intervening role with regard to the relationship between inclusive leadership and academics’ discretionary behaviors. The

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

# p values

0.000 0.001 0.000 0.003 0.000

0.007 0.000

0.000 0.000

results of our study may attract researchers’ attention to the importance of inclusive leadership in encouraging extra-role behaviors in higher education settings.

Ourresultsindicateimportantpracticalimplicationsforhighereducationorganizationsin generaland thePalestinianacademic sectorinspecific. First,leadership inclusivenessshould be adopted in the mindset of university managers, as it increases administrators’ consciousness in relation to the creation of a systematic multicultural environment. Second, inclusive leadership creates opportunities for academics to engage in the decision- making process, which implies that they will act in a collaborative and participatory manner and will go beyond their required work in terms of extra-role behaviors. Managers of higher education organizations should highlight inclusion mindset and diversity tolerance when recruiting leaders at their organizations. Moreover, higher education institutions should reinforce the concept of inclusion, through training, seminars and workshops. On another note, organizational learning should be effectively employed to produce knowledge and provoke change. University managers might use organizational learning as a framework to understand how universities develop strategies, make decisions, and foster extra-role performance among their employees. Consequently, universities are called to promote organizational learning within both the academic and administrative aspects of university life.Universitiesshouldalsoprovideavenuesforcontinuousdialogueandcollaborationsince this will result in fruitful outcomes at both organizational and individual levels.

More specifically, the Palestinian higher education institutions are invited to consider important implications of inclusiveness at their workplace. Leaders in these institutions need to visualize inclusion as means to foster a diversity-inclusive civic culture, as this simulates learning climate and discretionary behaviors among academic staff. organizational Therefore, inclusive leaders’ strategies need to encourage institutional capacity building in order to provide academic members a voice in the institutional climate, which would increase theorganizationalmembers’familiaritywiththeneedforinclusion.Thiscanbedonethrough the introduction of training centers and networks aimed at reinforcing the concept inclusiveness and its value for the academic community and society in general. Inclusive leadership activities need to concentrate on changing the work environment through engaging the minority of the academic members (i.e. in terms of religion or gender) to act as diversity change agents. For instance, activities may include appointing women for administrative roles devoted to form and define the academic work in these institutions. Furthermore, these institutions are called upon establishing diversity and inclusion identifiable offices like vice president office for diversity and inclusion. These offices would bring fruitful results in promoting the image of the work climate that welcomes diversity and increasing minority’ loyalty and commitment to the organization. In addition, as inclusive leaders have the potential of transforming these institutions into inclusive learning organizations and inclusive leadership practices can bring useful social capital implications through encouraging social relationships between diverse academic members (e.g.age,sexandreligion). Thiswouldalsohaveitspositiveeffecton strengtheningthesocial networks and fabric of the whole society.

Limitations and future research Some limitations in this research need to be highlighted to provide future research opportunities. First, our data were collected from one source. Although the authors have followed some remedial procedures in order to reduce the common method bias, the authors call for future research to collect data from multiple sources, including supervisors’ ratings. Second, our research examined the impact of inclusive leadership on extra-role behaviors via only organizational learning. Future studies might consider other mediating factors which might play an intervening role among the examined relationships. Mediating factors such as

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

411

# IJEM 36,4

412

climate for creativity and inclusive climate can be addressed (Ashikali et al., 2020; Karatepe et al., 2020). Third, the study utilized a sample in Palestine, which might set limitations on the generalizability of the findings. Therefore, the authors recommend further studies, to replicate this study in higher education settings within different cultures, since the Palestinian higher education is particular due to several challenges the sector encounters. Finally, collecting qualitative data or utilizing mixed-research methods would provide in- depth analysis of how inclusive leadership encourages extra-role behaviors and enable a climate of organizational learning.

Conclusion The study proposed a model of effects of inclusive leadership on academic staff’ extra-role behaviors, namely, organizational citizenship behavior and innovative work behavior. Organizational learning was theorized to serve as a mediating variable among the aforementioned relationships. Using data collected from academic staff working in the Palestinian higher education institutions, the results indicated that inclusive leadership showed a positive relationship with extra-role behaviors of academic staff. Organizational learning showed to play effective and significant intervening role between the links examined.Thestudyadvisesfutureresearchtoreplicatethemodelinotheracademicsettings and examine other intervening mechanisms which may govern the relationship between inclusive leadership and its consequences.

## ORCID iDs Mohammed Aboramadan Khalid Abed Dahleez

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3826-0559

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1526-8750

References Aboramadan, M. (2020), “The effect of green HRM on employee green behaviors in higher education: the mediating mechanism of green work engagement”, International Journal of Organizational Analysis, Vol. ahead of print No. ahead of print.

Aboramadan, M. and Dahleez, K.A. (2020), “Leadership styles and employees’ work outcomes in nonprofit organizations: the role of work engagement”, Journal of Management Development, Vol. 39 Nos 7-8, pp. 869-893.

Aboramadan, M., Dahleez, K. and Hamad, M.H. (2020a), “Servant leadership and academics outcomes in higher education: the role of job satisfaction”, International Journal of Organizational Analysis, Vol. ahead of print No. ahead of print.

leadership and academics’ engagement in higher education: mediation analysis”, Journal for Higher Education Policy and Management, Vol. 42 No. 6, pp. 617-633.

# (2020b), “Servant

## Aboramadan, M., Dahleez, K. and Hamad, M.H.

Adewale, A.S. and Ghavifekr, S. (2019), “Leadership self-efficacy and staff organizational citizenship behavior in higher education institutions: experience from Nigeria”, International Journal of Leadership in Education, Routledge, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 116-133.

Afsar, B., Badir, Y.F. and Bin Saeed, B. (2014), “Transformational leadership and innovative work behavior”, Industrial Management and Data Systems, Emerald Group Publishing, Vol. 114 No. 8, pp. 1270-1300.

Alge, B.J., Ballinger, G.A., Tangirala, S. and Oakley, J.L. (2006), “Information privacy in organizations: empowering creative and extrarole performance”, Journal of Applied Psychology, American Psychological Association, Vol. 91 No. 1, pp. 221-232.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

Ali, F., Kim, W.G., Li, J. and Cobanoglu, C. (2018), “A comparative study of covariance and partial least squares based structural equation modelling in hospitality and tourism research”, International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 416-435.

Altuno(cid:3)glu, A.E. and Bulgurcu G€urel, E.B. (2015), “Effects of leader–member exchange and perceived in

innovation: the case of Denizli Technopark”, organizational support on organizational € Ozs¸ahin, M. (Ed.), Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, Elsevier, Vol. 207, pp. 175-181.

Amabile, T.M. (2013), “Componential theory of creativity”, in Kessler, E.H. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of

## Management Theory, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, pp. 134-139.

Amabile, T.M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby,

## J. and Herron, M. for creativity”, Academy of Management

# work environment pp. 1154-1184.

(1996), “Assessing the Journal, Vol. 39 No. 5,

Aryee, S., Budhwar, P.S. and Chen, Z.X. (2002), “Trust as a mediator of the relationship between justice and work outcomes: test of a social exchange model”, Journal of

organizational Organizational Behavior, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 267-285.

Ashikali, T. and Groeneveld, S. (2015), “Diversity management in public organizations and its effect leadership and the the organizational culture”, Review of Public Personnel Administration,

on employees’ affective commitment: inclusiveness of Vol. 35 No. 2, pp. 146-168.

# the role of

# transformational

Ashikali, T., Groeneveld, S. and Kuipers, B. (2020), “The role of inclusive leadership in supporting an inclusive climate in diverse public sector teams”, Review of Public Personnel Administration, Online first, doi: 10.1177/0734371X19899722.

Awasthy, R. and Gupta, R.K. (2012), “Dimensions of the learning organization in an Indian context”, Journal of Emerging Markets, Emerald Group Publishing, Vol. 7 No. 3,

# International pp. 222-244.

Bauwens, R., Audenaert, M., Huisman, J. and Decramer, A. (2019), “Performance management fairness implications for organizational citizenship behaviors”, Studies in Higher

## and burnout: Education, Routledge, Vol. 44 No. 3, pp. 584-598.

(2017), “Exploring relationship between learning organizations dimensions and organizational performance”, International Journal of Emerging Markets, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 593-609.

# Bhaskar, A.U. and Mishra, B.

Blau, P.M. (1964), Exchange and Power in Social Life, 1st ed., Wiley, New York, NY. Bolton, A. (1996), “The leadership challenge in universities: the case of business schools”, Higher

## Education, Springer, Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 491-506.

Brimhall, K.C. (2021), “Are we innovative? Increasing perceptions of nonprofit innovation through leadership, inclusion, and commitment”, Review of Public Personnel Administration, Vol. 41 No. 1, pp. 3-24.

Brislin, R.W. (1986), “The wording and translation of research instruments.”, in Lonner, W.J. and Berry, J.W. (Eds), Field Methods in Cross-Cultural Research, Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, pp. 137-164.

Cai, W., Lysova, E.I., Khapova, S.N. and Bossink, B.A.G. (2018), “Servant leadership and innovative work behavior in Chinese high-Tech firms: a moderated mediation model of meaningful work and job autonomy”, Frontiers in Psychology Frontiers Media S.A., Vol. 9 No. 1, p. e1767. Carmeli, A., Reiter-Palmon, R. and Ziv, E. (2010), “Inclusive leadership and employee involvement in creative tasks in the workplace: the mediating role of psychological safety”, Creativity Research Journal, Routledge, Vol. 22 No. 3, pp. 250-260.

Choi, S.B., Tran, T.B.H. and Park, B. Il. (2015), “Inclusive leadership and work engagement: mediating roles of affective organizational commitment and creativity”, Social Behavior and Personality: An International Journal, Scientific Journal Publishers, Vol. 43 No. 6, pp. 931-943.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

413

# IJEM 36,4

Choi, S.B., Tran, T.B.H. and Kang, S.-W. (2017), “Inclusive leadership and employee well-being: the

mediating role of person-job fit”, Journal of Happiness Studies, Vol. 18 No. 6, pp. 1877-1901.

Confessore, S.J. and Kops, W.J. (1998), “Self-directed learning and the learning organization: examining the connection between the individual and the learning environment”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 365-375.

414

Dahleez, K.A., Aboramadan, M. and Bansal, A. (2020), “Servant leadership and affective commitment: the role of psychological ownership and person–organization fit”, International Journal of Organizational Analysis, Vol. ahead of print No. ahead of print.

Danish, R.Q., Munir, Y., Ishaq, M.I. and Arshad, A. (2014), “Role of organizational learning, climate and justice on teachers’ extra-role performance”, Journal of Basic and Applied Scientific Research, Vol. 4 No. 1, pp. 9-14.

# De Jong, J. and Den Hartog, D.

## (2010), “Measuring innovative work behaviour”, Creativity and

## Innovation Management, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 23-36.

Dee, J.R. and Lei(cid:1)syt_e, L. (2016), “Organizational learning in higher education institutions: theories, (Ed.), Higher Education:

frameworks, and a potential research agenda”, Handbook of Theory and Research, Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 275-348. Dorenbosch, L., van Engen, M.L. and Verhagen, M. (2005), “On-the-job innovation: the impact of job design and human resource management through production ownership”, Creativity and Innovation Management, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 129-141.

# in Paulsen, M.B.

Dvir, T., Eden, D., Avolio, B.J. and Shamir, B. (2002), “Impact of transformational leadership on follower development and performance: a field experiment”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 45 No. 4, pp. 735-744.

# Evans, A. and Chun, E.

(2015), “Department chairs as transformational diversity leaders”, The

## Department Chair, Vol. 25 No. 3, pp. 1-3.

## (1981), “Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable

# Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.F.

variables and measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 39-50.

Garvin, D.A. (1993), “Building a learning organization”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 71 No. 4,

pp. 73-91.

(2009), “Stimulating lecturers’ polytechnics”, Academic Leadership: The Online Journal, Vol. 7 No. 4, p. e29.

# Ghani, N. and Jusoff, K.

# innovative behaviour in Malaysian

Gigliotti, R.A. (2017), “An exploratory study of academic leadership education within the association Journal of Applied Research in Higher Education, Emerald

## of American Universities”, Publishing, Vol. 9 No. 2, pp. 196-210.

Guo, Y., Zhu, Y. and Zhang, L. (2020), “Inclusive leadership, leader identification and employee voice behavior: the moderating role of power distance”, Current Psychology, Online first, doi: 10.1007/ s12144-020-00647-x.

Hair, J.F., Ringle, C.M. and Sarstedt, M. (2011), “PLS-SEM: indeed a silver bullet”, Journal of Marketing

## Theory and Practice, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 139-152.

Hair, J.F., Sarstedt, M., Pieper, T.M. and Ringle, C.M. (2012), “The use of partial least squares structural equation modeling in strategic management research: a review of past practices and recommendations for future applications”, Long Range Planning, Vol. 45 No. 5, pp. 320-340.

Hair, J.F., Hult, G.T.M., Ringle, C. and Sarstedt, M. (2016), A Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM), 2nd ed., Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, California. Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J. and Anderson, R.E. (2019), Multivariate Data Analysis, 8th ed.,

# Cengage Learning EMEA, Hampshire.

(2002), “Emerging concepts of academic leadership and their implications for intra- institutional roles and relationships in higher education”, European Journal of Education, Wiley, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 29-41.

# Henkel, M.

Hollander, E.P. (1964), Leaders, Groups, and Influence, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

# Hollander, E.P. (2009), Inclusive Leadership: The Essential Leader-Follower Relationship, Routledge/

# Taylor & Francis Group, New York, NY.

Hsiao, H.-C. and Chang, J.-C. (2011), “The role of organizational learning in transformational leadership

and organizational innovation”, Asia Pacific Education Review, Vol. 12 No. 4, p. 621.

Hulland, J. (1999), “Use of partial least squares (PLS) in strategic management research: a review of

## four recent studies”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 20 No. 2, pp. 195-204.

Javed, B., Khan, A.K. and Quratulain, S. (2018), “Inclusive leadership and innovative work behavior: examination of LMX perspective in small capitalized Textile firms”, The Journal of Psychology, Routledge, Vol. 152 No. 8, pp. 594-612.

Javed, B., Naqvi, S.M.M.R., Khan, A.K., Arjoon, S. and Tayyeb, H.H. (2019), “Impact of inclusive Journal of

the role of psychological safety”,

leadership on innovative work behavior: Management and Organization, Cambridge University Press, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 117-136. Jensen, P.E. (2005), “A contextual theory of learning and the learning organization”, Knowledge and

## Process Management, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 53-64.

Jo, S.J. and Joo, B.-K. (2011), “Knowledge sharing: the influences of learning organization culture, organizational commitment, and organizational citizenship behaviors”, Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, SAGE Publications, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 353-364.

Joo, B.-K.(Brian) and Shim, J.H. (2010), “Psychological empowerment and organizational commitment: learning culture”, Human Resource Development

the moderating effect of organizational International, Routledge, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 425-441.

Karatepe, O.M., Aboramadan, M. and Dahleez, K.A. (2020), “Does climate for creativity mediate the impact of servant leadership on management innovation and innovative behavior in the hotel industry?”, International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, Vol. 32 No. 8, pp. 2497-2517.

Kessel, M., Hannemann-Weber, H. and Kratzer, J. (2012), “Innovative work behavior in healthcare: the benefit of operational guidelines in the treatment of rare diseases”, Health Policy, Vol. 105 No. 2, pp. 146-153.

Kezar, A.J. and Holcombe, E.M. (2020), “Barriers to organizational learning in a multi-institutional

## initiative”, Higher Education, Vol. 79 No. 1, pp. 1119-1138.

# Kock, N.

(2015), “Common method bias in PLS-SEM: a full collinearity assessment approach”,

## International Journal of e-Collaboration, IGI Global, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 1-10.

Komives, S.R., Lucas, N. and McMahon, T.R. (2013), Exploring Leadership: For College Students Who

Want to Make a Difference, 3rd ed., Jossey-Bass, Wiley & Sons, San Franscisco, California.

Krause, D.E. (2004), “Influence-based leadership as a determinant of the inclination to innovate and of innovation-related behaviors: an empirical investigation”, The Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 79-102.

Kutner, M.H., Nachtsheim, C.J. and Neter, J. (2004), Applied Linear Regression Models, 4th ed., McGraw-

# Hill Education, Homewood, New York, NY.

# Lawrence, J., Ott, M. and Bell, A.

(2012), “Faculty organizational commitment and citizenship”,

## Research in Higher Education, Vol. 53 No. 3, pp. 325-352.

Liden, R.C., Wayne, S.J., Zhao, H. and Henderson, D. (2008), “Servant leadership: development of a multi-dimensional measure and multi-level assessment”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 161-177.

Liu, Y. (2009), “Perceived organizational support and expatriate organizational citizenship behavior: the mediating role of affective commitment towards the parent company”, Personnel Review, Emerald Group Publishing, Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 307-319.

Marsick, V.J. and Watkins, K.E. (2003), “Demonstrating the value of an organization’s learning culture: the dimensions of the learning organization questionnaire”, Advances in Developing Human Resources, SAGE Publications, Vol. 5 No. 2, pp. 132-151.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

415

# IJEM 36,4

McCauley, C.D. and Van Velsor, E. (2004), Handbook of Leadership Development, Jossey-Bass, Wiley &

# Sons, San Franscisco, California.

Mitchell, R., Boyle, B., Parker, V., Giles, M., Chiang, V. and Joyce, P. (2015), “Managing inclusiveness and diversity in teams: how leader inclusiveness affects performance through status and team identity”, Human Resource Management, Vol. 54 No. 2, pp. 217-239.

416

(2014), “Individual and contextual determinants of innovative work behaviour: proactive goal generation matters”, Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 87 No. 4, pp. 645-670.

## Montani, F., Odoardi, C. and Battistelli, A.

# Moughrabi, F. (2015), “Palestinian universities under siege”, International Higher Education, Vol. 36

No. 1, pp. 9-10.

# (2005), “Organizational

learning and educational change”,

# Mulford, B.

(Ed.), Extending Educational Change: International Handbook of Educational Change, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 336-361.

# in Hargreaves, A.

Najmaei, A. and Sadeghinejad, Z. (2019), “Inclusive leadership: a scientometric assessment of an emerging field”, Diversity within Diversity Management (Advanced Series in Management), Emerald Publishing, Vol. 22, pp. 221-245.

# Organ, D.W. (1988), Organizational Citizenship Behavior: The Good Soldier Syndrome, Lexington

# Books, Lexington, MA.

Organ, D.W. (1990), “The motivational basis of organizational citizenship behavior”, in Staw, B.M. and Cummings, L.L. (Eds), Research in Organizational Behavior, Jai Press, Greenwich, CT, Vol. 12, pp. 43-72.

Owusu-Agyeman, Y. (2019), “Transformational leadership and innovation in higher education: a participative process approach”, International Journal of Leadership in Education, Online first, doi: 10.1080/13603124.2019.1623919.

# (PCBS). Palestinian Center Bureau of Statistics (2019), Available at: www.pcbs.gov.ps/ (accessed

June 2020).

Panicker, A., Agrawal, R.K. and Khandelwal, U. (2018), “Inclusive workplace and organizational citizenship behavior: study of a higher education institution, India”, Equality, Diversity and Inclusion, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 37 No. 6, pp. 530-550.

Piccolo, R.F., Greenbaum, R., den Hartog, D.N. and Folger, R. (2010), “The relationship between ethical leadership and core job characteristics”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 31 Nos 2-3, pp. 259-278.

Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Paine, J.B. and Bachrach, D.G. (2000), “Organizational citizenship behaviors: a critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions for future research”, Journal of Management, SAGE Publications, Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 513-563.

Qi, L. and Liu, B. (2017), “Effects of inclusive leadership on employee voice behavior and team performance: the mediating role of caring ethical climate”, Frontiers in Communication, Vol. 2 No. 1, p. e8.

Qi, L., Liu, B., Wei, X. and Hu, Y. (2019), “Impact of inclusive leadership on employee innovative behavior: perceived organizational support as a mediator”, PloS One, Public Library of Science, Vol. 14 No. 2, p. e0212091.

Rademaker, M.E., Schuberth, F. and Dijkstra, T.K. (2019), “Measurement error correlation within blocks of indicators in consistent partial least squares: issues and remedies”, Internet Research, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 29 No. 3, pp. 448-463.

Randel, A.E., Galvin, B.M., Shore, L.M., Ehrhart, K.H., Chung, B.G., Dean, M.A. and Kedharnath, U. (2018), “Inclusive leadership: realizing positive outcomes through belongingness and being valued for uniqueness”, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 190-203. Real, J.C., Rold(cid:4)an, J.L. and Leal, A. (2014), “From entrepreneurial orientation and learning orientation learning and the

to business performance: analysing the mediating role of organizational

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

moderating effects of organizational size”, British Journal of Management, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 186-208.

Rigdon, E.E. (2012), “Rethinking partial least squares path modeling: in praise of simple methods”,

## Long Range Planning, Vol. 45 No. 5, pp. 341-358.

Rigdon, E.E. (2016), “Choosing PLS path modeling as analytical method in European management

research: a realist perspective”, European Management Journal, Vol. 34 No. 6, pp. 598-605.

Ringle, C.M., Sarstedt, M., Mitchell, R. and Gudergan, S.P. (2020), “Partial least squares structural Journal of Human Resource

equation modeling in HRM research”, The International Management, Routledge, Vol. 31 No. 12, pp. 1617-1643.

Ryan, J. (2006), “Inclusive leadership and social justice for schools”, Leadership and Policy in Schools,

# Routledge, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 3-17.

(2017), “Happiness at work and organisational learning a missing link?”, International Journal of

## Salas-Vallina, A., Alegre, J. and Fernandez, R.

## citizenship behaviour: Manpower, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 38 No. 3, pp. 470-488.

is organisational

Schuberth, F., Henseler, J. and Dijkstra, T.K. (2018), “Partial least squares path modeling using ordinal

categorical indicators”, Quality and Quantity, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 9-35.

Scott, S.G. and Bruce, R.A. (1994), “Determinants of innovative behavior: a path model of individual innovation in the workplace”, Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management, Vol. 37 No. 3, pp. 580-607.

Senge, P.M. (2010), The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization, revised,

# Crown Publishing Group, New York, NY.

Shahab, H. and Imran, R. (2018), “Cultivating university teachers’ innovative work behavior: the case of Pakistan”, Business and Economic Review, Institute of Management Sciences, Vol. 10 No. 1, pp. 159-177.

Shin, S.J. and Zhou, J. (2003), “Transformational leadership, conservation, and creativity: evidence from Korea”, Academy of Management Journal, Academy of Management, Vol. 46 No. 6, pp. 703-714.

Shore, L.M., Cleveland, J.N. and Sanchez, D. (2018), “Inclusive workplaces: a review and model”,

## Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 176-189.

Siddique, C.M. (2018), “Learning organization and firm performance: making a business case for the learning organization concept in the United Arab Emirates”, International Journal of Emerging Markets, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 689-708.

(cid:1) Skerlavaj, M., Song, J.H. and Lee, Y. (2010), “Organizational learning culture, innovative culture and innovations in South Korean firms”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 37 No. 9, pp. 6390-6403.

# Stefani, L. and Blessinger, P.

(2017),

## Inclusive Leadership in Higher Education:

# International

## Perspectives and Approaches, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, New York, NY.

Strandli, P.I. (2006), The University; A Learning Organization?: An Illuminative Review Based on

## System Theory, Karlstad University Studies, Sweden.

# Strathe, M.I. and Wilson, V.W.

## (2006), “Academic leadership: the pathway to and from”, New

## Directions for Higher Education, ERIC, Vol. 2006 No. 134, pp. 5-13.

Temple, J.B. and Ylitalo, J. (2009), “Promoting inclusive (and dialogic) leadership in higher education institutions”, Tertiary Education and Management, Routledge, Vol. 15 No. 3, pp. 277-289. Tran, T.B.H. and Choi, S.B. (2019), “Effects of inclusive leadership on organizational citizenship behavior: the mediating roles of organizational justice and learning culture”, Journal of Pacific Rim Psychology, Cambridge University Press, Vol. 13 No. 1, p. e17.

van Ameijde, J.D.J., Nelson, P.C., Billsberry, J. and van Meurs, N. (2009), “Improving leadership in Higher Education institutions: a distributed perspective”, Higher Education, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 763-779.

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)

## Inclusive leadership and extra-role behaviors

417

# IJEM 36,4

Voolaid, K. and Ehrlich, €U. (2017), “Organizational learning of higher education institutions: the case of Estonia”, The Learning Organization, Emerald Publishing, Vol. 24 No. 5, pp. 340-354.

(2011), “How leader–member exchange influences effective work behaviors: social exchange and internal–external efficacy perspectives”, Personnel Psychology, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 64 No. 3, pp. 739-770.

## Walumbwa, F.O., Cropanzano, R. and Goldman, B.M.

418

Wang, Y. (2008), “Emotional bonds with supervisor and co-workers: relationship to organizational commitment in China’s foreign-invested companies”, The International Journal of Human Resource Management, Routledge, Vol. 19 No. 5, pp. 916-931.

White, J. and Weathersby, R. (2005), “Can universities become true learning organizations?”, The

## Learning Organization, Emerald Group Publishing, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 292-298.

Wilkins, S., Butt, M.M. and Annabi, C.A. (2018), “The influence of organisational identification on employee attitudes and behaviours in multinational higher education institutions”, Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, Routledge, Vol. 40 No. 1, pp. 48-66.

(1991), “Job satisfaction and organizational commitment as predictors of organizational citizenship and in-role behaviors”, Journal of Management, SAGE Publications, Vol. 17 No. 3, pp. 601-617.

# Williams, L.J. and Anderson, S.E.

Xerri, M.J. and Brunetto, Y. (2013), “Fostering innovative behaviour: the importance of employee commitment and organisational citizenship behaviour”, The International Journal of Human Resource Management, Routledge, Vol. 24 No. 16, pp. 3163-3177.

(2004), “The construct of the learning organization: dimensions, measurement, and validation”, Human Resource Development Quarterly, John Wiley & Sons, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 31-55.

Yang, B., Watkins, K.E. and Marsick, V.J.

Yeh-Yun Lin, C. and Liu, F.-C. (2012), “A cross-level analysis of organizational creativity climate and perceived innovation: the mediating effect of work motivation”, European Journal of Innovation Management, Emerald Group Publishing, Vol. 15 No. 1, pp. 55-76.

(cid:1) Skerlavaj, M. (2009), “Transactional and transformational leadership impacts on organizational learning”, Journal of East European Management Studies, Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Vol. 14 No. 2, pp. 144-165.

# Zagor(cid:1)sek, H., Dimovski, V. and

Zeng, J. and Xu, G. (2020), “Ethical leadership and young university teachers’ work engagement: a moderated mediation model”, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 1-15.

Zhang, L.-L., Yang, F. and Gu, Y.-H. (2016), “Inclusive leadership: conception, measurement and relationships to related variables”, Advances in Psychological Science, Vol. 24 No. 9, pp. 1467-1477.

Srivastava, A., Bartol, K.M. and Locke, E.A. (2006), “Empowering leadership in management teams: effects on knowledge sharing, efficacy and performance”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 49 No. 6, pp. 1239-1251.

Corresponding author Mohammed Aboramadan can be contacted at: mohammed.aboramadan@uninsubria.it

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website: www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

(cid:68)(cid:111)(cid:119)(cid:110)(cid:108)(cid:111)(cid:97)(cid:100)(cid:101)(cid:100)(cid:32)(cid:102)(cid:114)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:32)(cid:104)(cid:116)(cid:116)(cid:112)(cid:58)(cid:47)(cid:47)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:119)(cid:46)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:97)(cid:108)(cid:100)(cid:46)(cid:99)(cid:111)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:47)(cid:97)(cid:114)(cid:116)(cid:105)(cid:99)(cid:108)(cid:101)(cid:45)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:52)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:47)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:51)(cid:55)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:47)(cid:105)(cid:106)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:54)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:57)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:112)(cid:100)(cid:102)(cid:32)(cid:98)(cid:121)(cid:32)(cid:103)(cid:117)(cid:101)(cid:115)(cid:116)(cid:32)(cid:111)(cid:110)(cid:32)(cid:48)(cid:57)(cid:32)(cid:83)(cid:101)(cid:112)(cid:116)(cid:101)(cid:109)(cid:98)(cid:101)(cid:114)(cid:32)(cid:50)(cid:48)(cid:50)(cid:53)