## Whither Industrial and Organizational Psychology in

# a Changing World of Work?

## Wayne F, Cascio University of Colorado at Denver

Dramatic changes are affecting the world of work. Ex- amples include increased global competition, the impact of information technology, the re-engineering of business processes, smaller companies that employ fewer people, the shift from making a product to providing a service, and the growing disappearance of “the job’ as a fixed bundle of tasks. These trends are producing a redefinition of work itself. They provide great opportunitities for in- dustrial and organizational psychologists to contribute to the betterment of human welfare. This article identifies 6 key areas in which to start: job analysis, employee selec- tion, training and development, performance appraisal, compensation (including incentives), and organizational development. Relevant research in these areas can provide substantial payoffs for individuals, organizations, and so- ciety as psychology moves into the 21st century.

These changes reflect the impact of globalized prod- uct and service markets, coupled with increased domestic competition (largely fueled by deregulation in telecom- munications, airlines, and banking) and new business start-ups. By a wide margin, however, global competition is the single most powerful economic fact of life in the 1990s. In the relatively sheltered era of the 1960s, only 7% of the U.S. economy was exposed to international competition. In the 1980s, that number zoomed past 70%, and it will keep climbing (Gwynne, 1992). Today, one in five American jobs is tied directly or indirectly to inter- national trade. Merchandise exports are up more than 40% since 1986, and every $1 billion in U.S. merchandise exports generates approximately 20,000 new jobs. For the most part these are good jobs that pay about 22% more than average (“Investing in people,” 1994).

s citizens of the 20th century, we have witnessed more change in our daily existence and in our environment than anyone else who ever walked the planet. But if you think the pace of change was fast in this century, expect it to accelerate in the next one. The 21st century will be even more complex, fast paced, and turbulent. It will also be very different. Industrial and organizational psychology potentially has much to con- tribute to this new world of work. It has the potential to lead change rather than to simply react to it, but to do so it must seize opportunities to provide research-based answers to pressing organizational problems. This article is organized into two parts. The first part describes some of the dramatic changes that are affecting the world of work; the second proposes a research agenda in six key areas in which applied psychologists often practice. I begin by considering the changing nature of economic competition.

# Changing Nature of Economic Competition

The results of accelerated global competition have been almost beyond comprehension—free political debate throughout the former Soviet empire, democratic reforms in Central and South America, the integration of the Eu- ropean community, the North American Free Trade Agreement, and an explosion of free market entrepre- neurship in Southern China. In short, the free markets and free labor markets that we in the United States have enjoyed throughout our national history have now be- come a global passion (Doyle, 1992).

There is no going back. Today, firms and workers in America must compete for business with firms and work- ers in the same industries in England, France, and Ger- many; in Poland, Hungary, and the former Russian re- publics; in Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile; and in Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong, and China, just to name a few of our competitors. How- ever, it takes more than trade agreements, technology, capital investment, and infrastructure to deliver world- class products and services. It also takes the skills, inge- nuity, and creativity of a competent, well-trained work- force. Our competitors know this, and they are spending unstintingly to create one.

Just as wars—two World Wars, the Korean conflict, Viet- nam, and Desert Storm—dominated the geopolitical map of the 20th century, economics will rule over the 21st. The competition that is normal and inevitable among nations increasingly will be played out, not in aggression or war but in the economic sphere. The weapons used will be those of commerce: growth rates, investments, trade blocs, and imports and exports (Nelan, 1992).

Editor’s note. William C. Howell served as action editor for this article.

Author’s note. Portions of this article were presented as part of a pres- identi address to the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psy- chology at its Eighth Annual Convention, San Francisco, May 1993.

Correspondence eqncerning this article should be addressed to Wayne F. Cascio, Graduate School of Business, University of Colorado— Denver, Campus Box 165, P.O. Box 173364, Denver, CO 80217-3364.

928

November 1995 « American Psychologist Copyright 1995 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/95/$2.00 Vol. 50, No. 11, 928-939

# Wayne F. Cascio

The World Competitiveness Report (1994) provides aranking of countries that combines the quality of public education, levels of secondary schooling and on-the-job training, computer literacy, and worker motivation. The United States ranks sixth, behind (in descending order) Singapore, Denmark, Germany, Japan, and Norway. Al- though none of the higher-ranking countries is as heter- ogeneous as the United States, the lesson for decision makers is clear: The race to create a broad, technically literate labor pool has no finish line!

# Impact on Jobs in the United States

As nations around the world move from wartime to peacetime economies, from industrial societies to infor- mation societies, we are witnessing wrenching structural changes in our economy. These changes have impacted most profoundly in terms of jobs (Cascio, 1993). In the United States, more than 7 million permanent layoffs have been announced since 1987. That number includes 6 million between 1987 and 1992 (Baumohl, 1993), 615,000 in 1993 (Byrne, 1994), and 516,000 in 1994 (Murray, 1995).

Companies are not downsizing because they are los- ing money. Fully 81% of companies that downsize in a given year were profitable in that year. Major reasons, according to the American Management Association’s 1994 survey on downsizing, were strategic or structural in nature: to improve productivity, transfers of location, new technological processes, mergers and acquisitions, or plant obsolescence (“1994 AMA”).

Laid-off workers who must return to the job market often must take huge pay cuts. Downward mobility is the rule rather than the exception (“‘Downside,” 1994). Of

roughly 2,000 workers let go by RJR Nabisco, for ex-

ample, 72% found jobs subsequently but at wages that

averaged only 47% of their previous pay (“Jobs,” 1993).

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

Surprisingly, older, higher-paid workers may fare better. A recent study of 311 workers (285 men and 26 women) whose average age and salary were 57 and $75,000, re- spectively, took an average of 5.6 months to land jobs that paid an average of $61,500 (Drake, Beam, Morin, Inc., 1994), Whether young or old, however, the bottom line for most reemployed workers is that both their spending power and their standards of living have dropped.

What’s happening here? In a nutshell, as an executive in the pharmaceutical.industry noted, we’re moving from an economy where there are a lot of hard-working people to one where there are fewer, smarter-working people (Pi- lon, 1993). Jobs aren’t being lost temporarily because of a recession; rather, they are being wiped out permanently as a result of new technology, improved machinery, and new ways of organizing work. In the following sections, I briefly examine the impact of these changes and then discuss how organizations are responding, particularly to the changes affecting managers and workers.

## Effects of Technology on Organizations and People

Fifty million workers use computers every day along with other products of the digital age—faxes, modems, cellular - phones, and E-mail. This is breaking down departmental barriers, enhancing the sharing of vast amounts of infor- mation, creating ‘virtual offices” for workers on the go, collapsing product development cycles, and changing the ways that organizations ‘service customers and relate to their suppliers and to their employees. To succeed and prosper in the changing world of work, companies need motivated, technically literate workers.

A caveat is in order here, however. It relates to the common assumption that because production processes have become more sophisticated, high technology can substitute for skill in managing a workforce. Beware of such a “logic trap.”” On the contrary, high technology actually makes the workforce even more important for success, as Pfeffer (1994) has noted,

This is because more skill may be necessary to operate the more sophisticated and advanced equipment, and with a higher level of investment per employee, interruptions in the process are increasingly expensive. This means that the ability to effectively operate, maintain, and repair equipment—tasks all done by first-

line employees—become even more critical. (p. 8)

Ideally, therefore, technology will help workers make de- cisions in organizations that encourage them to do so (“Workplace of the Future,” 1993). However, organiza- tions of the future will look very different from organi- zations of the past, as the next section illustrates.

## Changes in the Structure and Design of Organizations

In today’s world of fast-moving global markets and fierce

competition, the windows of opportunity are often frus- tratingly brief (Byrne, 1993). The features that dominated

industrial society’s approach to designing organizations

929

throughout the 19th and 20th centuries—mass produc- tion and large organizations—are disappearing. Trends such as the following are accelerating the shift toward new forms of organization for the 2 {st century (Kiechel, 1993): (a) smaller companies that employ fewer people; (b) the shift from vertically integrated hierarchies to net- works of specialists; (c) technicians, ranging from com- puter repair persons to radiation therapists, replacing manufacturing operatives as the worker elite (see Barley, 1991); (d) pay tied less to a person’s position or tenure in an organization and more to the market value of his or her skills; (e) the change in the paradigm of doing busi- ness from making a product to providing a service; and (f) the redefinition of work itself—growing disappearance of “the job” as a fixed bundle of tasks (see Bridges, 1994) and increased emphasis on constantly changing work re- quired to fulfill the ever-increasing demands of customers. This will require constant learning, more higher order thinking, and the availability to work outside the standard hours of9 a.m. to 5 p.m.

In this emerging world of work, more and more or- ganizations will focus carefully on their core competencies and outsource everything else. They will be characterized by terms such as virtual, boundary-less, and flexible, with no guarantees to workers or managers. Hundreds of big companies have outsourced noncore operations: Conti- nental Bank Corporation has contracted its legal, audit, cafeteria, and mailroom operations to outside companies. American Airlines is doing the same with customer service jobs at 30 airports.

This approach to organizing is no short-term fad. The fact is, organizations are becoming leaner and leaner, with better and better trained ‘‘multispecialists” —those who have in-depth knowledge about a number of different aspects of the business. Eschewing narrow specialists or broad generalists, organizations of the future will come to rely on cross-trained multispecialists to get things done. One such group whose roles are changing dramatically is that of managers.

# The Changing Role of the Manager

In the traditional hierarchy that used to comprise most bureaucratic organizations, rules were simple. Managers ruled by command from the top (essentially one-way communication), used rigid controls to ensure that frag- mented tasks (grouped into clearly defined jobs) could be coordinated effectively, and partitioned information into neat compartments—departments, units, and func- tions. Information was (and is) power, and, at least in some cases, managers clung to power by hoarding infor- mation. This approach to organizing, that is, 3-C (com- mand, control, and compartmentalization) logic, was geared to achieve three objectives: stability, predictability, and efficiency.

In today’s reengineered, hypercompetitive work en- vironments, the autocratic, top-down command-and- control approach is out of step with the competitive real- ities that many organizations face. To survive, organi- zations have to be able to respond quickly to shifting

930

## market conditions. In this kind of an environment, a key

job for all managers, especially top managers, is to artic- ulate a vision of what the organization stands for and what it is trying to accomplish. The next step is to trans-

late that vision into everything that is done and to use the vision as a benchmark to assess progress over time.

A large and growing number of organizations now

recognize that they need to emphasize workplace de- mocracy to achieve the vision. This involves breaking down barriers, sharing information, using a collaborative approach to problem solving, and an orientation toward continuous learning and improvement. For many man- agers, these kinds of skills simply weren’t needed in or- ganizations designed and structured under 3-C logic.

Does this imply that we are moving toward a uni- versal model of organizational and leadership effective-

ness? Hardly. Contingency theories of leadership such as path-goal theory (House, 1971), normative decision the- ory (Vroom & Yetton, 1973), or least-preferred coworker (LPC) contingency theory (Fiedler, 1967) suggest that an autocratic style is appropriate in some situations. In recent years many organizations (e.g., Eaton Corporation and Levi Strauss & Co.) have instituted formal information- sharing and workplace education programs that reduce or eliminate a key condition that makes autocratic lead- ership appropriate—workers who lack the information or knowledge needed to make meaningful suggestions or decisions. More often, today’s networked, interdependent, culturally diverse organizations require tranformational leadership (Bass, 1985). The ability of leaders to transform followers to bring out their creativity, imagination, and best efforts requires well-developed interpersonal skills, founded on an understanding of human behavior in or- ganizations. Industrial and organizational psychologists are well-positioned to help managers develop these kinds of skills.

In addition, although by no means universal, much of the work that results in a product, service, or decision is now done in teams—intact, identifiable social systems (even if small or temporary) whose members have the authority to manage their own task and interpersonal processes as they carry out their work. Such teams go by a variety of names—autonomous work groups, process teams, and self-managing work teams. All of this implies a radical reorientation from the traditional view of a manager’s work.

In this kind of an environment, workers are acting more like managers, and managers more like workers. The managerial roles of controllers, planners, and in- spectors are being replaced by coaches, facilitators, and mentors (Wellins, Byham, & Wilson, 1991). This doesn’t just happen—it requires good interpersonal skills, con- tinuous learning, and an organizational culture that sup- ports and encourages both.

Flattened hierarchies also mean that there are fewer managers in the first place. The empowered worker will be a defining feature of such organizations.

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

The Empowered Worker—No Passing Fad It should be clear by now that we are in the midst of a revolution—a revolution at work. Change isn’t coming only from large, high-profile companies doing high-tech- nology work. It has also permeated unglamorous, low- tech work. As an example, consider Toronto-based Cadet Uniform Services, which outfits the employees of some of North America’s leading corporations (Henkoff, 1994). Cadet doesn’t just hire people to drive trucks, deliver clean uniforms, and pick up dirty ones. Rather, its concept of customer service representatives (CSRs) extends much further. They are mini-entrepreneurs who design their own routes, manage their own accounts, and, to a large extent, determine the size of their paychecks.

Cadet ties compensation almost entirely to measures of customer satisfaction. Lose a customer on your watch and your salary sinks. CSR pay is about $40,000 a year, nearly twice the industry average. In practice, Cadet rarely loses a customer; its annual defection rate is less than 1%. Employees don’t leave either; turnover is a low 7%. Toa large extent this is because Cadet spends considerable time and effort on selecting employees—who take pride in their work, are exceedingly neat, and are outgoing. In all, 46 ethnic groups are represented at Cadet.

How has the company done? Its annual growth has averaged 22% for the past 20 years, and it boasts double- digit profit margins that exceed the industry norm. Says Quentin Wahl, chief executive officer, ““The jobs we do aren’t so special—the pay is good, but it’s not great. The main thing we have to sell to employees is the culture of the organization” (Henkoff, 1994, p. 122).

Organizations of the 1990s, both large and small, differ dramatically in structure, design, and demographics from those of even a decade ago. Demographically, they are far more diverse. They comprise more women at all levels, more multiethnic, multicultural workers, more older workers, workers with disabilities, robots, and con- tingent workers. Paternalism is out; self-reliance is in. There’s constant pressure to do more with less and steady emphasis on empowerment, cross-training, personal flexibility, self-managed work teams, and continuous learning. Workers today have to be able to adapt to changing circumstances and be prepared for multiple ca- reers. Industrial and organizational psychologists are helping to educate prospective, current, and former workers to these new realities. In the future, they will be

expected to do much more, as I describe later, but first I consider some organizational responses to these new real- ities.

## Implications for Organizations and Their People

What do these trends imply for the ways that organizations

will compete for business? In a world where virtually every factor that affects the production of goods or the delivery of services—capital, equipment, technology, and infor-

## mation—is available to every player in the global econ-

omy, the one factor that doesn’t routinely move across national borders is a nation’s workforce. In the years to

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

come, the quality of the American workforce will be a crucial determinant of America’s ability to compete and win in world markets.

Human resources can be sources of sustained com- petitive advantage as long as they meet three basic re- quirements: (a) They add positive economic benefits to the process of producing goods or delivering services; (b) the skills of the workforce are distinguishable from those of competitors (e.g., through education and workplace learning); and (c) such skills are not easily duplicated (Barney, 1991). Human resource systems (the set of in- terrelated processes designed to attract, develop, and maintain human resources) can either enhance or destroy this potential competitive advantage (Lado & Wilson, 1994).

Perhaps a quote attributed to Albert Einstein, the famous physicist, best captures the position of this article. After the first atomic reaction in 1942, Einstein remarked, “Everything has changed, except our way of thinking” (“Workplace of the Future,” 1993, p. 2). As psychology in general, and industrial and organizational psychology in particular, stands poised on the brink of the 2ist cen- tury, I believe that our greatest challenge will be to change the way we as a field think about organizations and their people. The first part of this article addressed some key changes in the world of work; the remainder identifies some pressing research questions that must be addressed if our science is to remain relevant to 21st-century or- ganizations.

## A Research Agenda for Industrial and Organizational Psychologists

Each of the following sections identifies traditional prac- tices, new developments, and research questions that re- quire attention if the field is to lead organizational change rather than react to it. These sections are job analysis, employee selection, training and development, perfor- — mance appraisal, compensation (including incentives), and organization development. Admittedly, these areas represent only some of the broad range of activities that psychologists are engaged in and that relate to the man- agement of people in work settings. In total, however, they comprise much of the work in this area.

Job Analysis: Identifying the Work to Be Done and the Personal Characteristics Necessary to Do the Work

Traditional task-based “jobs” were once packaged into clusters of similar tasks and assigned to specialist workers.

Today, many firms have no reason to package work that

way. Instead, they are unbundling tasks into broader chunks of work that change over time. Such shifting clus- ters of tasks make it difficult to define a job, at least in the traditional sense. Practices such as flex time, job shar- ing, and telecommuting, not to mention temporary workers, part-timers, and consultants, have compounded the definitional problem.

Job analysis is a common activity of industrial and organizational psychologists, and there exists a well-de-

931

fined technology for doing such analysis (Gael, 1988; Harvey, 1991; Ilgen & Hollenbeck, 1991; McCormick, 1979). Terms such as job element, task, duty, position, job, job description, and job family are well-understood parts of the lexicon of industrial and organizational psy- chologists everywhere.

Today, however, there is a detectable shift away from a task-based toward a process-based organization of work. A process is a collection of activities (such as procurement, order fulfillment, product development, or credit issu- ance) that takes one or more kinds of input and creates an output that is of value to a customer (M. Hammer & Champy, 1993). Customers may be internal or external. Individual tasks are important parts of the process, but the process itself cuts across organizational boundaries and traditional functions, such as engineering, produc- tion, marketing, and finance.

Consider credit issuance as an example. Instead of the separate jobs of credit checker and pricer, the two may be combined into one “deal structurer.” Such in- tegrated processes cut response time and increase effi- ciency and productivity. Bell Atlantic created a “case team’’—a group of people who have among them all of the skills necessary to handle an installation order. Mem- bers of the team—who previously were located in different departments and in different geographical areas—were brought together into a single unit and given total re- sponsibility for installing the equipment. Such a process operates, on average, ten times faster than the assembly line version it replaces. Bell Atlantic, for example, reduced the time it takes to install a high-speed digital service link from 30 days to 3 (M. Hammer & Champy, 1993).

Employees involved in the process are responsible for ensuring that customers’ requirements are met on time and with no defects, and they are empowered to experi- ment in ways that will cut cycle time and reduce costs. Result: Less supervision is needed, while workers take on broader responsibilities and a wider purview of activities. Moreover, the kinds of activities that each worker does are likely to shift over time.

in terms of traditional job analysis, this leaves many unanswered questions and a number of challenges. Some of these questions follow.

What will be the future of traditional task-based de- scriptions of jobs and job activities? Should other types of descriptors replace task statements that describe what a worker does, to what or whom, why, and how? Will “task cluster” statements or “subprocess” statements be- come the basic building blocks for describing work? What does a job description look like in a process-based or- ganization of work? Will job specifications (which identify the personal characteristics--knowledge, skills, abilities, and other characteristics—necessary to do the work) su- persede job descriptions? Does identification of the en- vironmental, contextual, and social dimensions of work become more important in a process-based structure? Will emphasis shift from describing jobs to describing roles?

932

Managers often look to industrial and organizational psychologists to help them analyze jobs and describe work processes as a foundation for other human resource man- agement activities, such as employee selection, training, compensation, work and organization design, and per- formance appraisal. In the next section, I discuss the im- plications of the new organization of work for employee selection.

# Selecting Employees

In the traditional paradigm, so-called “one-shot” selec- tion—placement programs worked as follows: analyze the job, identify relevant job performance criteria, identify job-related predictors of performance, validate predictors, and then select candidates who score highest on the set of validated predictors. As with job analysis, the tech- nology for working within this paradigm is also well de- veloped (see, e.g., Cascio, 1991; Guion, 1991; Schmitt & Borman, 1993).

I just described the problems associated with ana- lyzing jobs under a process-based organization of work. To compound those problems, consider that relatively few jobs in today’s economy are performed independently of others and that most are interdependent or coordinate in nature—that is, they are a function of group efforts, not just the sum of individual talents. For example, both Xerox Corporation and General Electric (GE) now de- velop new products through multidisciplinary teams that work in a single process, instead of vertical functions or departments. At GE a senior team of 9-12 people oversees nearly 100 processes or programs worldwide, from new product design to improvement of the yield on production machinery. The senior team—consisting of managers with multiple competencies rather than narrow specialists— exists to allocate resources and ensure coordination of the processes and programs. “They stay away from the day-to-day activities, which are managed by the teams themselves,” explains Harold Giles, manager of human resources in GE’s lighting business (“The Horizontal Corporation,” 1993, p. 79). That’s quite a change from the traditional role of a supervisor.

Let us add just one more complicating factor to this mix: In some cases workers will join intact work teams that stay together to perform different kinds of work, such as assembly of different models of an automobile, or dif- ferent products entirely, as under a flexible manufacturing system. In project-based work, such as research and de- velopment, consulting, legal defense, or movie production, “virtual” teams consisting of multidisciplinary players are created to work on a project and then are disbanded when the project is finished. In these cases, the nature of the work changes, as does the composition of the teams that do the work.

From the point of view of industrial and organiza- tional psychology, the challenge is to move beyond valid, job-based predictors because the work to be done changes constantly. This raises a number of research issues rele- vant to the selection of employees (including managers): How does the selection process influence team effective-

# November 1995 « American,Psychologist

ness? As Klimoski and Jones (1995) noted, selecting the right mix of individuals to comprise a team implies at- tention to worker requirements on at least three dimen- sions: ability, values and personality, and politics (a team member’s future role in making things happen once a decision is reached).

Will the role of tests of cognitive abilities focus on identifying candidates with general (as opposed to specific) abilities, such as basic verbal and numeracy skills, the ability to think critically, to reason logically, and to draw conclusions from a body of facts? If so, this would com- port with recent findings that general cognitive ability is an efficient predictor in terms of job performance (Ree & Earles, 1992; Ree, Earles, & Teachout, 1994) and training performance (Ree & Earles, 1991).

How can psychology contribute to the optimal use of people with lower levels of cognitive abilities? Because not all jobs require high levels of cognitive ability (e.g., many types of service jobs), what other types of predictors of work performance will validly forecast success in such jobs? Services, which now account for 74% of the gross domestic product, and 79% of all employment in the United States, are expected to account for all of the net growth in jobs in the next decade. Will measures of per- sonality characteristics—for example, adaptability, em- pathy, and ability to work under stress—receive relatively more attention than cognitive ability tests in jobs whose primary objective is customer service? To be sure, the ability to select, train, and retain front-line, customer- contact workers will be a top priority for many organi- zations. Companies such as Marriott and Disney now require the same skills of workers that they once de- manded of managers—-“‘people who are resilient and re- sourceful, empathetic and enterprising, competent and creative” (Henkoff, 1994, p. 110).

There is no question that well-developed measures of personality characteristics can account for additional variance in the prediction of behavior on the job (Hogan, 1991; Ones, Mount, Barrick, & Hunter, 1994; Tett, Jack- son, Rothstein, & Reddon, 1994), Although a wide variety of such measures exists, they have not been used routinely to select employees. However, given the emphasis on ef- fective interpersonal interaction in the new forms of work organization, more and more managers insist that such characteristics be taken into account. This poses another question of interest to industrial and organizational psy- chologists, namely the following:

## Do alternative modes of pre-hire personality assess-

ment—paper-and-pencil measures, interactive video,

## computer-based, structured individual or group inter-

views, or situational tests, for example—provide equiv- alent psychometric properties? Do they measure the same constructs? As Campbell and Fiske (1959) noted, any test

or other measurement procedure is really a trait-method

unit—that is, a test measures a given trait by a single method. Hence if one wants to know the relative contri-

bution of trait and method variance to test scores, one

must study more than one trait (e.g., dominance and af- filiation) and use more than one method (e.g., paper and

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

pencil and interactive video). Second-order confirmatory factor analysis (Marsh & Hocevar, 1988) may be especially helpful in this context.

To probe personality characteristics, pre-hire as- sessment procedures, especially those used by large or- ganizations, often include patterned behavior description interviews, in which candidates are asked to provide de- tailed accounts of actual situations (Alderman, 1995). For example, instead of asking, ““How would you reprimand an employee?” now it’s “Give me a specific example of a time you had to reprimand an employee. What action did you take, and what was the result?” Answers tend to be remarkably consistent with actual (i.e., subsequent) job behavior (Dipboye & Gaugler, 1993; Weekley & Gier, 1987).

Alternatively, interviewers may pose ““What would you do if. . .?” questions. Such questions compose the situational interview, which is based on the assumption that a person’s expressed behavioral intentions are related to subsequent behavior. In the situational interview, can- didates are asked to describe how they think they would respond in certain job-related situations. Validities for both types of interviews vary from about 0.22 to 0.28 (Motowidlo et al., 1992). This brings up the following questions. (a) Does it matter whether patterned behavior description interview questions or situational interview questions are administered face-to-face or by computer? (b) Do they (interview questions) measure the same con- structs and yield equivalent validities? (c) Will work sam- ples or situational tests be used more frequently to assess the compatibility of potential team members, especially members of self-managed work teams? Such procedures measure the ability to do, not just the ability to know. Group-based situational tests (e.g., the leaderless group discussion) have long been used in management selection (e.g., Bass, 1954). How should they be designed to fit the context of a self-managed team—whether intact or virtual?

“Why is it that I always get a whole person when what I really want is a pair of hands?” Henry Ford la- mented (Labich, 1994, p. 64). In today’s (and tomorrow’s) world of work, characteristics of the whole person—cog- nitive as well as personality—are required to improve continuously the business processes that satisfy the needs of internal and external customers. Managers know this, and increasingly they are turning to industrial and or- ganizational psychologists for answers.

# Training and Development

The old Chinese proverb, “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day; teach a man to fish and you feed him for life,” fits neatly into today’s emphasis on self-reliance

and career resiliency. Career-resilient workers are dedi- cated to continuous learning. They stand ready to reinvent themselves to keep pace with change, they take respon- sibility for their own career management, and they are committed to their company’s success (Waterman, Wa- terman, & Collard, 1994). This implies two things: (a)

Companies must make it easy for employees to learn and

933

to become flexible, and (b) workers should have the right to obtain ongoing training.

For example, at Sun Microsystems, a core value is

“We acknowledge the essential link between company growth and the development of individuals” (‘“Career,” 1994). To make this link a reality, Sun supports training and development activities in three areas: (a) assessment of interests, values, and temperament (to help employees understand who they are and where they are going); (b) assessment and development of technical and functional work skills (to help employees benchmark and improve their work performance); and (c) assessment and devel- opment of work strategies (to help employees understand and improve their performance in areas such as problem- solving and conflict resolution).

Compelling as the idea of training may seem, there are strong disincentives for implementing it. To illustrate, consider just three macrolevel structural issues in the de- sign and delivery of training (Cascio, 1994b):

- 1. Corporate commitment is lacking and uneven. Most companies spend nothing at all on training. Those that do spend tend to concentrate on managers, techni- cians, and professionals, not rank-and-file workers. Fully 89% of American workers never receive any formal train- ing from their employers (“Labor Letter,” 1991).

- 2. Poaching trained workers is a major problem for U.S. businesses and provides a strong disincentive for training. Unlike in Germany, where local business groups pressure companies not to steal one another’s employees, there is no such system in the United States (Salwen, 1993). This has profound consequences for “‘selling” se- nior managers on the value of training in the United States.

- 3. Despite the rhetoric about training being viewed as an investment, current accounting rules require that it be treated as an expense. Business might spend more on training if accounting rules were revised. Unlike in- vestments in plant and equipment, which show up on the books as an asset, training expenditures are seen merely as expenses to be deducted in the year they are incurred (“Labor Letter,” 1991).

Industrial and organizational psychologists have little control over these macrolevel problems. However, there is much that they can contribute. For example, with re- spect to the poaching problem, it is important to point out the “training paradox,” as described by Robert Wa- terman (Filipczak, 1995). The paradox runs both ways. That is, if employees take charge of their own employa- bility by keeping their skills updated and varied so they can work for anyone, de facto they build more job security with their current employer—assuming the employer values highly skilled, motivated employees. Similarly, the company that provides lots of training and learning op- portunities is more likely to retain workers because it creates an interesting and challenging environment. In theory, therefore, increasing an individual’s employability outside a company simultaneously increases his or her job security and desire to stay with the current employer.

934

A related area in which psychologists can contribute on the basis of strong inferences from data is that of train- ing evaluation. The literature on training evaluation shows that whereas the potential returns from well-conducted training programs can be substantial, there is often con- siderable variability in the effectiveness with which any given training method or content area is implemented (Cascio, 1994a). Considerable planning (through needs analysis) and follow-up program evaluation efforts are necessary to realize these returns. Both needs analysis and program evaluation are well-developed areas in in- dustrial and organizational psychology (Goldstein, 1989, 1994; Kraiger, Ford, & Salas, 1993).

For example, one issue that often vexes employers is whether to spend money on reskilling programs for older workers with shorter payback periods. Another is whether to invest in training for the hard-core unem- ployed or for workers who lack basic literacy skills. In both cases, business sees lower payback probabilities. Utility analyses can play an important role in dispelling myths about the costs of training relative to its benefits. The technology is available now to do such analyses (Cas- cio, 1989), and a number of them already have been re- ported in the personnel psychology literature (Cascio, 1994a). However, what generally has not been reported, and that will be essential in the future, is objective evi- dence of the extent to which the financial returns fore- casted by utility analyses actually do materialize.

One area in which objective evidence does indicate positive payoffs for individual and organizational perfor- mance is that of high-performance work practices (HPWPs), of which training is an integral component. Such practices provide workers with the information, skills, incentives, and responsibility to make decisions es- sential for innovation, quality improvement, and rapid response to change (U.S. Department of Labor, 1993). A recent study based on a national sample of nearly 1,000 publicly-traded firms found that HPWPs have an eco- nomically and statistically significant impact both on employee turnover and productivity on short-term and long-term measures of corporate financial performance (Huselid, 1995).

Earlier I showed how the roles of workers and man- agers are changing dramatically, from controlled to em- powered, from boss to mentor. Both groups will require extensive training and support to change entrenched at- titudes and beliefs to function effectively in the new world of work. For example, empowered employees need to de- velop the kind of understanding of business and financial issues that no one but an owner or an executive used to be concerned with (Bridges, 1994). Moreover, several studies have supported the novel proposition that the “skills gap” is really about attitudes (Cappelli, 1992). Thus a 1989 employer survey by Towers Perrin found that the most common reasons for firing new employees were ab- senteeism and failure to adapt to the work environment; only 9% of the workers were dismissed because of diffi- culties in learning how to perform their jobs. A 1990 survey by the National Association of Manufacturers

# November 1995 * American Psychologist

found that the belief that applicants would not have the work attitudes and behaviors needed to adapt to the work environment was almost twice as common a reason for rejecting applicants as the next most important factor. This raises several intriguing research questions:

If attitudes play such an important role in work per- formance, then constructs such as adaptability, consis- tency, and prosocial behavior become particularly im- portant components of workplace learning programs. To what extent can such characteristics.be taught? How should they be taught? To what extent can research find- ings in applied social psychology, cognitive psychology, and instructional technology inform training practice in these areas?

In designing training systems to promote team de- velopment and workplace learning, what are the most effective methods for developing skill, knowledge, and at- titudinal competencies (Cannon-Bowers, Tannenbaum, Salas, & Volpe, 1995)? Do results hold up when teams must operate in stable as opposed to rapidly changing environments?

Senior managers are looking for evidence of the ex- tent to which workers and managers can change their attitudes and behavior to fit new organizational designs. Research is needed to identify methods and activities that will facilitate and maintain such change. The relapse pre- vention model, a cognitive-behavioral model of self-con- trol strategies designed to reduce the likelihood of relapse, is a good place to start (Marx, 1982).

# Performance Appraisal

Performance appraisal refers to the systematic description of the job-relevant strengths and weaknesses of an indi- vidual or group. In recent years, one issue that has gen-

erated considerable debate is the relevance and appro- priateness of performance appraisal in work contexts that emphasize total quality management (TQM).

TQM emphasizes the continuous improvement of products and processes to ensure long-term customer sat- isfaction. Its group problem-solving focus encourages employee empowerment by using the job-related expertise and ingenuity of the workforce. Cross-functional teams develop solutions to complex problems, often shortening the time taken to design, develop, or produce products and services. Because a team may not include a repre- sentative of management, the dividing line between labor and management often becomes blurred in practice, as workers themselves begin to solve organizational prob- lems. Thus adoption of TQM generally requires cultural change within the organization as management reex-

## amines its past methods and practices in light of the de-

## mands of the new philosophy (Wiedman, 1993).

If the “father of TQM,” W. Edwards Deming, had his way, appraisal systems that tie individual performance to salary adjustments would be eliminated. In his view, such systems hinder teamwork, create fear and mistrust, and discourage risk-taking behavior, thereby stifling in- novation. Worse yet, Deming believes, most appraisal

# November 1995 * American Psychologist

uals have significant control over their own perfor- mance—that is, that most individuals can improve if they choose to do so by putting forth the necessary effort (Deming, 1986).

Most industrial and organizational psychologists would agree that as a basis for implementing a “pay-for- performance” philosophy, performance appraisal is a meaningful tool only if workers have significant control over the variables that impact their individual perfor- mance. If not, then it is true, as Deming (1986) believes, that appraisals only measure random statistical variation within a particular system. Here are three suggestions for harmonizing these two processes (Wiedman, 1993): Let customer expectations (a) generate individual or team performance expectations, (b) include results expectations that identify actions to meet or exceed those expectations, and (c) include behavioral skills that make the real dif- ference in achieving quality performance and total cus- tomer satisfaction.

Here are several other pressing research issues in

# appraisal:

- 1. Traditionally, the immediate supervisor is re- sponsible for rating subordinates (Bernardin & Beatty, 1984; Murphy & Cleveland, 1991). New organizational designs that incorporate self-managed work teams or manufacturing “cells” (small teams of workers) may not have an immediate supervisor. Research is needed to provide answers to questions such as Who should rate performance under these circumstances and on what cri- teria? What should be the relative role (if any) of custom- ers or suppliers? McIntyre and Salas (1995) have identified a number of behavioral indicators of team performance, and their work can help guide future research in this area. 2. To create greater allegiance to a process, rather than to a boss, GE has begun to put in place so-called **360—-degree appraisals” in which peers and others above and below the employee evaluate the performance of an individual in a process (‘““The Horizontal Corporation,” 1993; see also Tornow, 1993). Research is needed to iden- tify the relative weights of the various raters as well as optimal means for combining information. Moreover, given that multiple perspectives are represented (e.g.,

peers, subordinates, and supervisors), and that each is best able to rate different aspects of performance (Bor- man, 1974; Mabe & West, 1982), what should each rater rate?

- 3. In work that is highly coordinate in nature (e.g.,

grant proposal writing and process reengineering), it is simply not possible to disaggregate individual from team performance. Although individual behaviors can be rated (e.g., initiative, flexibility, and effort), individual outcomes cannot. As McIntyre and Salas (1995) pointed out, team-

work and task work are distinct. Research is needed to identify the components and mechanics of team-based performance appraisal.

- 4. What is the most appropriate format and method for communicating performance feedback when multiple perspectives are represented? Should a single individual serve as the conduit for such feedback? Who is responsible

- 4. What is the most appropriate format and method for communicating performance feedback when multiple perspectives are represented? Should a single individual serve as the conduit for such feedback? Who is responsible

935

for following up to ensure that goals are set and progress is monitored? What is the long-term impact of such feed- back on behavior and work outcomes (Smither et al., 1995)?

Answers to these kinds of questions are particularly relevant to the changing world of work. Industrial and organizational psychologists have the tools and know-how to advance cumulative knowledge in this area while mak- ing genuine contributions to better management of hu-

# man resources.

# Compensation and Incentives

Traditionally, pay systems were job-based. That is, each job had an intrinsic worth (identified through the process of job evaluation) so that, in theory at least, pay stayed relatively constant regardless of who performed the job. Individual contributions were rewarded, as was position in the hierarchy and tenure on the job. Base salaries tended to increase year after year, as percentage increases yielded larger and larger amounts of money added to the base.

In today’s flatter, less hierarchical organizations, the old assumptions about pay systems are being questioned. Some organizations are rewarding employees not just for individual performance but also for the development of their skills and for team or organizational performance (Ost, 1995). Others are asking employees to put more of their pay at risk. Consider each of these trends.

In a skill- or knowledge-based pay system, workers are not paid on the basis of the job they currently are doing but rather on the basis of the number of jobs they are capable of doing, or on their depth of knowledge. In such a “learning environment,” the more workers learn, the more they earn. Workers at American Steel & Wire can boost their annual salaries by up to $12,480 by ac- quiring as many as 10 skills. Is there any impact on pro- ductivity or morale? A recent survey of 27 companies with such programs revealed that 70% to 88% reported higher job satisfaction, product quality, or productivity. Some 70% to 75% reported lower operating costs or re- duced turnover (“Skill-Based Pay,” 1992).

Such systems cannot work in all situations. They seem to work best when the following conditions exist (Gomez-Mejia & Balkin, 1992): (a) A supportive human resource management (HRM) philosophy underpins all employment activities (such a philosophy is characterized by mutual trust and the conviction that employees have the ability and motivation to perform well); (b) HRM programs such as profit sharing, participative manage- ment, empowerment, and job enrichment complement the skill- or knowledge-based pay system; (c) technology and organization structure change frequently; (d) em- ployee exchanges (i.e., assignment and rotation) are com- mon; (e) there are opportunities to learn new skills; (f) employee turnover is relatively high; and (g) workers value teamwork and the opportunity to participate.

A second trend among many firms is to increase the proportion of pay that is at risk or variable, thereby re- ducing fixed costs. A third trend is to use team or orga-

936

nization-wide incentives, such as profit sharing or pro- ductivity gain sharing, to provide broader motivation than is furnished by incentive plans geared to individual em- ployees. Their aim is twofold: to increase productivity and to improve morale by giving employees a feeling of participation in and identification with the company (Florkowski, 1987).

It is important to distinguish gain sharing from profit sharing. The two approaches differ in three important ways (T. H. Hammer, 1988): (a) Gain sharing is based on a measure of productivity. Profit sharing is based on a global profitability measure. (b) Gain sharing, produc- tivity measurement, and bonus payments are frequent events, distributed monthly or quarterly, whereas the measures and rewards of profit-sharing plans are annual. (c) Gain-sharing plans are current distribution plans, in contrast to most profit-sharing plans, which have deferred payments. Hence gain-sharing plans are true incentive plans rather than employee benefits. As such, they are more directly related to individual behavior and therefore can motivate worker productivity.

Does profit sharing improve productivity? One re- view of 27 econometric studies found that profit sharing was positively related to productivity in better than 9 of every 10 instances. Productivity was generally 3% to 5% higher in firms with profit-sharing plans than in those without plans (U.S. Department of Labor, 1993).

Does gain sharing improve productivity? Of 72 companies using Improshare (Fein, 1982)—production standards based on time-and-motion studies, plus a shar- ing of productivity gains 50-50 between employees and the company-—38 companies were nonunion and 34 were represented by 18 international unions. The average gain in productivity over all companies using the plan after one year was 22.4%. Productivity gains tended to be larger if workers were provided with training and information; gains tended to be smaller, none, or negative (i.e., pro- ductivity deteriorated) if workers perceived that there was “nothing in it” for them.

## Such changes in compensation and incentive systems

## raisé several important research questions:

t. American culture emphasizes “rugged individu- alism” rather than a group orientation. What specific contextual issues are relevant when team or organization- wide incentives are applied in such a culture?

- 2. Empowerment emphasizes an active role for em- ployees in determining outcomes. Yet employees some- times feel powerless to influence profits, as under a profit- sharing program. How can firms deal with this inconsis- tency?

- 3. Logically, team-based performance appraisals should form the basis for team-based incentives. However, there is almost no extant research on team-based ap- praisals (an exception is Norman & Zawacki, 1991), with respect either to process or to format.

- 4. Although firms such as General Foods, General Motors, Procter and Gamble, and Anheuser-Busch have been experimenting with skill- or knowledge-based pay (Tosi & Tosi, 1987), job evaluation methods remain more

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

popular. Why? What employee or work-related factors might enhance the applicability of such systems in a changing world of work?

# Organizational Development

Organizational development (OD) can be described broadly as the use of planned, behavioral science-based interventions in work settings for the purpose of improv- ing organizational functioning and individual develop- ment (Porras & Robertson, 1992). At its core, OD is about change, and in the future world of work, “the core com- petitive advantage for companies will be their capacity for mastering revolutionary change at all levels of the organization” (Tichy, 1994).

For many organizations, this will require a meta- morphosis into a “learning organization.” Yet as com- pelling a notion as that is, in-depth interviews with 350 executives in 14 industries found that in attempting to implement change, from work redesign to organization culture, many firms had not learned from their past mis- takes, or else somehow felt doomed to repeat them (Ar- thur D. Little, Inc., 1994). As many as 70%-80% of change initiatives had failed; 40% of the executives sur- veyed were very unhappy, finding change too slow or patchy; there were no significant benefits from the change initiatives; and 80% of the companies expected to be going through other major changes within a few years.

These results are not encouraging, but they certainly increase opportunities and raise some important research issues for industrial and organizational psychologists. These issues span two broad areas: planning for change (based on theory) and implementing change (based on practice). With respect to planning, the most pressing need is to develop a well-specified theory about the process of organizational change. Indeed, a comprehensive review of literature in the field of OD concluded, “It is a major weakness of the field that, as a group, the theories sup- posed to define the dynamics of the planned change pro- cess are so vague” (Porras & Robertson, 1992, p. 760). Specifically, two types of research are needed:

- 1. Identification and specification of alternative models of organizations on which to base change process theories. As has been shown, both the structure and va- riety of organizational forms are changing dramatically as organizations strive to meet the ever-changing demands of the marketplace. Change process theory is not keeping

# pace.

- 2. More comprehensive frameworks, categorization

schemes, or models that will allow industrial and orga- nizational psychologists to make sense of the theory and knowledge that already exists (Woodman, 1989).

## In the Arthur D. Little (1994) survey, those who

were successful in implementing change were able to help

managers and employees fundamentally change the way

they think about and approach change. This can be done in a number of ways. From the perspective of imple-

menting change, a variety of OD intervention techniques exists, from simple to complex, from short-term to long- term, from affecting one individual to affecting an entire

# November 1995 * American Psychologist

organization, and from affecting only one organizational variable (e.g., social factors) to affecting several (e.g., or- ganizing arrangements, technology, and physical setting; Porras & Robertson, 1992).

If OD interventions are to be maximally effective, however, practitioners must identify the best change tech- nique or combination of techniques to apply to a given situation, while at the same time addressing fundamental characteristics such as underlying assumptions, beliefs, and attitudes. Unfortunately, present OD theory does not provide sufficient guidance for determining the best tech- niques to use in particular situations. As a result, practice is leading theory, instead of the other way around (Mirvis, 1988).

# What Can Be Done?

Perhaps the greatest need in this area today, as in the past, is for methodologically sound evaluations of the rel- ative impact of alternative OD interventions. Problems such as the unit of analysis and random assignment of individuals to groups make classic experimental designs difficult to implement in field settings. This should not be cause for abandonment of efforts to evaluate the rel- ative impact of alternative interventions. Application of quasi-experimental designs, qualitative research methods (Van Maanen, 1979), and assessment of the agreement of laboratory and field results (Gersick, 1989) all can contribute to the advancement of knowledge and practice. Thousands of change efforts are initiated every year. If the field is to maintain a scientific basis for its continued existence, then it is essential to evaluate change efforts to determine which interventions have the greatest impact on which organizational variables. The ultimate objective is to develop cumulative knowledge that can be translated into a science-based practice of OD that is directly useful to organizations. Such knowledge will be critical to mas- tering change at all levels and ensuring a sustained com- petitive advantage for organizations that rely on behav- ioral science-based change interventions to do so.

# Summary and Conclusions

Dramatic changes are affecting the world of work. Some of these include increased global competition, the impact of information technology, the reengineering of business processes, the shift from vertically integrated hierarchies to networks of specialists, smaller companies that employ fewer people, and the change in the paradigm of doing business from making a product to providing a service. Beyond those, there is an emerging redefinition of work itself: growing disappearance of the job as a fixed bundle of tasks, along with an emphasis on constantly changing work required to fulfill the ever-increasing demands of

# customers.

There are great opportunities for industrial and or- ganizational psychologists to contribute to the betterment

of human welfare in the context of these changes. To lead

change rather than to follow it, however, will require a break with traditional practices and a focus on rigorous research that addresses emerging trends. This article

937

identified six key areas in which to start: job analysis, employee selection, training and development, perfor- mance appraisal, compensation (including incentives), and organizational development. These challenges provide an exciting agenda with large potential payoffs for indi- viduals, organizations, and society as psychology moves into the 21st century.

# REFERENCES

Alderman, L. (1995, April). What you need to ace today’s rough-and-

tough job interviews. Money, pp. 35, 36, 38.

Arthur D. Little, Inc. (1994, September). Managing organizational change: How leading organizations are meeting the challenge. Cam- bridge, MA: Author.

Barley, S. (1991). The new crafts: The rise of the technical labor force and its implications for the organization of work. Philadelphia: National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce, University of Pennsylvania.

Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage.

# Journal of Management, 17, 99-120.

Bass, B. M. (1954). The leaderless group discussion. Psychological Bul-

letin, 51, 465-492.

Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations.

# New York: Free Press.

Baumohl, B. (1993, March 15). When downsizing becomes “‘dumbsiz-

# ing.” Time, p. 55.

Bernardin, H. J., & Beatty, R. W. (1984). Performance appraisal: As-

sessing human behavior at work. Boston: Kent.

Borman, W. C. (1974). The rating of individuals in organizations: An alternative approach. Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor- mance, 12, 105-124.

Bridges, W. (1994, September 19). The end of the job. Fortune, pp. 62-

64, 68, 72, 74.

Byme, J. A. (1993, February 8). The virtual corporation. Business Week,

pp. 98-103.

Byrne, J. A. (1994, May 9). The pain of downsizing. Business Week,

pp. 60-69.

Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychological Bul- letin, 56, 81-105.

Cannon-Bowers, J. A., Tannenbaum, S. I., Salas, E., & Volpe, C. E. (1995). Defining competencies and establishing team training re- quirements. In R. A. Guzzo & E. Salas (Eds.), Team effectiveness and decision making in organizations (pp. 333-380). San Francisco: Jossey- Bass.

Cappelli, P. (1992). Is the “skills gap” really about attitudes? Philadelphia: National Center on the Educational Quality of the Workforce. (Ed- ucational Quality of the Workforce Catalog No. WP01)

Career management services @ Sun. (1994). Milpitas, CA: Author. Cascio, W. F. (1989). Using utility analysis to assess training outcomes. In I. Goldstein (Ed.), Training and development in organizations (pp. 63-88). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Cascio, W. F. (1991). Applied psychology in personnel management (4th

## ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Cascio, W. F. (1993, February). Downsizing: What do we know? What have we learned? Academy of Management Executive, 7(1), 95-104. Cascio, W. F. (1994a). Documenting training effctiveness in terms of worker performance and adaptability (Educational Quality of the Workforce Catalog No. WP23). Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl- vania, National Center for the Educational Quality of the Workforce. Cascio, W. F. (1994b). Public investments in training: Perspectives on macro-level structural issues and micro-level delivery systems (Edu- cational Quality of the Workforce Catalog No. WP24). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, National Center for the Educational Quality of the Workforce.

Deming, W. E. (1986). Out of the crisis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Center

# for Advanced Engineering Study.

Dipboye, R. L., & Gaugler, B. B. (1993). Cognitive and behavioral pro- cesses in the selection interview. In N. Schmitt & W. C. Borman

938

(Eds.), Personnel selection in organizations (pp. 135-170). San Fran- cisco: Jossey-Bass.

Downside to the jobs upturn. (1994, November 14). Business Week, p.

26.

Doyle, F. P. (1992, June). Unpublished keynote address, National Acad-

# emy of Human Resources, Santa Fe, NM.

Drake, Beam, Morin, Inc. (1994). Career transition study, November

1993 to August 1994. Washington, DC: Author.

Fein, M. (1982, August). Improved productivity through worker involve- ment. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Academy of Man-

# agement, New York.

Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A theory of leadership effectiveness. New York:

# McGraw-Hill.

## Filipczak, B. (1995, January). You’re on your own: Training, employ-

## ability, and the new employment contract. Training, pp. 29-36.

Florkowski, G. W. (1987). The organizational impact of profit sharing.

## Academy of Management Review, 12, 622-636.

Gael, S. (Ed.). (1988). The job analysis handbook for business, industry,

# and government. New York: Wiley.

Gersick, C. J. G. (1989). Marking time: Predictable transitions in task

## groups. Academy of Management Journal, 32, 274-309.

Goldstein, I. L. (Ed.). (1989). Training and development in work orga-

# nizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Goldstein, I. L. (1994). Training in organizations: Needs assessment, development, and evaluation (4th ed.). Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole. Gomez-Mejia, L. R., & Balkin, D. B. (1992). Compensation, organi- zational strategy, and firm performance. Cincinnati, OH: Southwest-

# ern.

Guion, R. M. (1991), Personnel assessment, selection, and placement. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 327-397). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Gwynne, S. C. (1992, September 28). The long haul. Time, pp. 34-38. Hammer, M., & Champy, J. (1993). Reengineering the corporation. New

# York: Harper Business, p. 90.

Hammer, T. H. (1988). New developments in profit sharing, gainsharing, and employee ownership. In J. P. Campbell & R. J. Campbell (Eds.), Productivity in organizations (pp. 328-366). San Francisco: Jossey- Bass.

Harvey, R. J. (1991). Job analysis. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 71-163). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. Henkoff, R. (1994, October 3). Finding, training, and keeping the best

# service workers. Fortune, pp. 110-122.

Hogan, R. T. (1991). Personality and personality measurement. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 873-919). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

House, R. J. (1971). A path-goal theory of leader effectiveness. Admin-

## istrative Science Quarterly, 16, 321-339.

Huselid, M. A. (1995). The impact of human resource management practices on turnover, productivity, and corporate financial perfor- mance. Academy of Management Journal, 38, 635-672.

Ilgen, D. R., & Hollenbeck, J. R. (1991), The structure of work: Job design and roles. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 2, pp. 165~- 207). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Investing in people and prosperity. (1994, May). U.S. Department of

# Labor, Washington, DC, p. 7.

Jobs in an age of insecurity. (1993, November 22). Time, p. 35. Kiechel, W., III. (1993, May 17). How we will work in the year 2000.

# Fortune, pp. 38-52.

Klimoski, R., & Jones, R. G. (1995). Staffing for effective group decision making: Key issues in matching people and teams. In R. A. Guzzo *& E. Salas (Eds.), Team effectiveness and decision making in orga- nizations (pp. 291-332). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Kraiger, K., Ford, J. K., & Salas, E. (1993). Application of cognitive, skill-based, and affective theories of learning outcomes to new methods of training evaluation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 78, 311-328. Labich, K. (1994, November 14). Why companies fail. Fortune, pp. 52-

54, 58, 60, 64, 68.

Labor letter. (1991, October 22). The Wail Street Journal, p. A}.

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

Lado, A. A., & Wilson, M. C. (1994). Human resource systems and sustained competitive advantage: A competency-based perspective. Academy of Management Review, 19, 699-727.

Mabe, P. A., & West, S. G. (1982). Validity of self-evaluation of ability: A review and meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 280- 296.

Marsh, H. W., & Hocevar, D. (1988). A new, more powerful approach to multitrait-multimethod analyses: Application of second-order confirmatory factor analysis. Journal ofApplied Psychology, 73, 107- 117.

Marx, R. D. (1982). Relapse prevention for managerial training: A model for maintenance of behavior change. Academy ofManagement Review, 7, 433-441.

McCormick, E. J. (1979). Job analysis: Methods and applications. New

# York: AMACOM.

MclIntyre, R. M., & Salas, E. (1995). Measuring and managing for team performance: Emerging principles from complex environments. In R. A. Guzzo & E. Salas (Eds.), Team effectiveness and decision making in organizations (pp. 9-45). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Mirvis, P. H. (1988). Organization development: Part 1: An evolutionary perspective. In W. A. Passmore & R. W. Woodman (Eds.), Research in organizational change and development (Vol. 2). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

Motowidlo, S. J., Carter, G. W., Dunnette, M. D., Tippins, N., Werner, S., Burnett, J. R., & Vaughan, M. J. (1992). Studies of the structured behavioral interview. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 571-587. Murphy, K. R., & Cleveland, J. N. (1991). Performance appraisal: An

## organizational perspective. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.

Murray, M. (1995, May 4). Thanks, goodbye: Amid record profits, com- panies continue to lay off employees. The Wall Street Journal, pp. Al, AS.

Nelan, B. W. (1992, Fall). How the world will look in 50 years (Special

## issue: Beyond the Year 2000). Time, pp. 36-38.

## 1994 AMA survey on downsizing and assistance to displaced workers.

## New York: American Management Association.

## Norman, C. A., & Zawacki, R. A. (1991, September). Team appraisals—

## team approach. Personnel Journal, pp. 101-104.

Ones, D. S., Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., & Hunter, J. E. (1994). Personality and job performance: A critique of the Tett, Jackson, and Rothstein (1991) meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 47, 147-156. Ost, E. J. (1995). Team-based pay: New wave strategic initiatives. In J. B. Miner & D. P. Crane (Eds.), Advances in the practice, theory, and research ofstrategic human resource management (pp. 353-366). New York: Harper Collins.

## Pffefer, J. (1994). Competitive advantage through people. Boston: Harvard

# Business School Press, p. 8.

Pilon, L. J. (1993, February 22). Quoted in “Jobs, Jobs.” Business Week,

p. 74.

Porras, J. I., & Robertson, P. J. (1992). Organizational development: Theory, practice, and research. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 3, pp. 719-822). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.

Ree, M. J., & Earles, J. A. (1991). Predicting training success: Not much

## more than g. Personnel Psychology, 44, 321-332.

Ree, M. J., & Earles, J. A. (1992). Intelligence is the best predictor of job performance. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 1, 86- 89.

# November 1995 « American Psychologist

Ree, M. J., Earles, J. A., & Teachout, M. S. (1994). Predicting job per- formance: Not much more than g. Journal ofApplied Psychology, 79, 518-524.

Salwen, K. G. (1993, April 19). The cutting edge: German-owned maker of power tools finds job training pays off. The Wall Street Journal,

# pp. Al, A7.

Schmitt, N., & Borman, W. C. (Eds.). (1993). Personnel selection in

## organizations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Skill-based pay boosts worker productivity and morale. (1992, April 18).

# ‘The Wail Street Journal, p. A1.

Smither, J. W., London, M., Vasilopoulos, N. L., Reilly, R. R., Millsap, R. E., & Salvemini, N. (1995). An examination of the effects of an upward feedback program over time. Personnel Psychology, 48, 1- 34.

Tett, R. P., Jackson, D. N., Rothstein, M., & Reddon, J. R. (1994). Meta- analysis of personality-job performance relations: A reply to Ones, Mount, Barrick, & Hunter (1994), Personnel Psychology, 47, 157- 172.

The horizontal corporation. (1993, December 20). Business Week, pp.

77-81.

Tichy, N. (1994, May). The future of workplace learning and perfor-

# mance. Training and Development, p. S46.

Tornow, W. W. (1993). Perceptions or reality: Is multi-perspective mea-

surement a means or an end? Human Resource Management, 32, 221-230.

Tosi, H., & Tosi, L. (1987). What managers need to know about know!-

## edge-based pay. In D. A. Balkin & L. R. Gomez-Mejia (Eds.), New

perspectives on compensation (pp. 43-48). Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

# Prentice Hall.

U.S. Department of Labor. (1993, August). High performance work

practices and firm performance. Washington, DC: U.S. Goverment Printing Office.

Van Maanen, J. (Ed.). (1979). Qualitative methodology [Special issue].

# Administrative Science Quarterly, 24(4).

Vroom, V. H., & Yetton, P. W. (1973). Leadership and decision making.

## Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.

Waterman, R. H., Jr, Waterman, J. A., & Collard, B. A. (1994, July-

August). Toward a career-resilient workforce. Harvard Business Review,

pp. 87-95.

Weekley, J. A., & Gier, J. A. (1987). Reliability and validity of the sit- uational interview for a sales position. Journal ofApplied Psychology, 72, 484-487,

Wellins, R. S., Byham, W. C., & Wilson, J. M. (1991). Empowered teams:

Creating self-directed work groups that improve quality, productivity, and participation. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Wiedman, T. G. (1993, October). Performance appraisal in a total quality

## management environment. The Industrial-Organizational Psychol-

ogist, 31(2), pp. 64-66.

Woodman, R. W. (1989). Organizational change and development: New

arenas for inquiry and action. Journal of Management, 15, 205-228.

Workplace of the future: A Report of the Conference on the Future of

the American Workplace. (1993). New York: U.S. Departments of

# Commerce and Labor.

World Competitiveness Report. (1994). Lausanne, Switzerland: World

## Economic Forum and Institute for Management Development.

939