# Magazine Article / Hybrid Work

Hybrid Still Isn’t Working Evidence suggests that it’s hurting collaboration, exacerbating social isolation, and weakening culture. Here’s how to fix it. by Peter Cappelli and Ranya Nehmeh

## From the Magazine (July–August 2025) / Reprint R2504L

# Ricky Adam

Over the past year, organizations large and small have been forcing

their employees to return to the oﬃce for the entire workweek. They are

responding to growing evidence that remote and hybrid arrangements

result in lower worker performance. But many companies don’t have

that option, for several reasons: They no longer have the oﬃce space

to house all their employees and either can’t quickly expand it or don’t

want to spend the money to do so; their employees are now dispersed

geographically; or they fear a rebellion by hard-to-replace talent. This

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

1

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

article is aimed at enterprises that want to keep remote or hybrid work

arrangements, at least for the time being.

Leaders of such companies must face this reality: You cannot eﬀectively

manage teams of remote or hybrid workers using the methods you

relied on when all employees were in the oﬃce together. Doing so

creates major problems for organizational culture, for how people are

managed day-to-day, for how they are promoted, and for performance

overall. Re-creating the cooperation and collaboration that happens in

the oﬃce in a virtual context requires new rules and policies—as well as

mandates that reel in some current practices.

# The Problems with Remote Work

Studies published in the past few years—looking at the eﬀect of remote

## work on collaboration among software engineers, the quality of ideas

generated by IT workers, and the productivity of data-entry workers—

show that remote and hybrid work arrangements have a dampening eﬀect on performance. Some of the problems with remote work—such

as the diﬃculties new hires face in learning the ropes and becoming

productive—have taken some time to show up. Now, ﬁve years since

the Covid pandemic forced many companies to implement remote

work, a large number of corporations—including Amazon, UPS, Boeing,

Walmart, and JPMorgan Chase—are responding to lower performance

with return-to-oﬃce mandates. Similar moves are underway in the

## United Kingdom, whose employers, along with those in the United

States, had been the most receptive to remote work. In a 2024 KPMG

survey of 1,325 CEOs of large companies in 11 countries, 83% expected

that their organizations would require a full return to the oﬃce within

# the next three years.

## One of us (Peter), with Jasmine Wu, then a postdoctoral researcher at

Wharton, took a deep dive into these issues. In late 2023, we interviewed

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

2

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

## 720 employees of a ﬁnancial services company across three countries

and 38 oﬃces. One group of about 20 people worked completely

remotely; the rest had hybrid arrangements. The results provide details

on how speciﬁc work practices changed in response to remote work and

illustrate why they create performance problems.

In brief, the problems that were revealed are ones that had long been

handled by personal relationships in oﬃces without people realizing it.

They all have to do with trying to get employees to act collectively. They

include the following:

New hires struggle. When teams work remotely, new hires can’t learn by

example, because there’s no one to watch. They can’t easily ask for help.

Conscientious peers in remote operations can’t see when newcomers are struggling and therefore don’t step in and oﬀer guidance. That’s a big

deal when you consider that average monthly turnover in the U.S. is 3%,

## or more than one-third of the workforce per year.

Collaboration and learning suffer. The usual advice to supervisors of

remote workers is to be concrete about what you want them to be

doing. We found exactly that happening, with a perverse outcome:

Employees focused on meeting their individual KPIs and accomplishing

their required tasks at the expense of helping colleagues or working on

## collective tasks not explicitly part of their KPIs.

In hybrid or remote arrangements, employees cannot stop by a

colleague’s desk and get a quick answer, so they must ping one another

electronically for help. But in our interviews we found that people

often indicated online that they were unavailable because they were

focused on their KPIs. They typically responded to requests for help

only after they had ﬁnished their own tasks—unless they had a personal

relationship with the employee asking for help, in which case they were

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

3

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

inclined to respond sooner. Some new hires told us that they often got

## no response to their pings—a manifestation of the absence of social ties.

Ricky Adam’s project Don’t You Forget About Me captures abandoned office plants of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Team members who see one another regularly in virtual meetings are

better positioned to get the help they need from their team; for them,

the biggest challenge is getting help or information from people on

other teams. To improve their chances of getting a response, employees

usually ask for an introduction from one of their own team members

with a personal connection to someone on the other team. The growing

problem, however, is that with retirements and other forms of turnover,

fewer coworkers know one another personally. While turnover is not

new, its impact is more disruptive in remote or hybrid settings, where

informal relationships are harder to build and maintain.

Meetings are less effective. By now, the drawbacks of virtual meetings

are well-known. In our focus groups, we examined two of the most pernicious: They dampen productivity, and they are less eﬀective in

generating useful ideas. We learned that virtual meetings are more

frequent, in part, because they are used to address issues that people

previously solved by sticking their heads in colleagues’ oﬃces to ask

for assistance. The number of participants in virtual meetings tends to

be larger than in in-person meetings, because there are no constraints

on space. And because peripheral people are included, the meetings

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

4

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

are less productive. We also heard that attendees of remote meetings

often multitask and don’t pay full attention. The result is that not only

are participants not contributing meaningfully but also the hosts of

meetings have to hold “postmeeting meetings” to explain to the people

who were distracted what they missed.

The wrong people get promoted. The shift in performance management engendered by remote work has had a strong eﬀect on who gets ahead.

We heard in our focus groups that promotions are now based much

more on individual performance, because that is what managers are

tracking. Managers often have no real idea whether colleagues can get

along with others, let alone manage them, because they rarely see them

interacting with other people. The performance management focus

on KPIs that often accompanies remote work has a serious drawback:

Research led by Alan Benson of the University of Minnesota has shown

that promoting the best individual performers into management jobs

leads to worse team performance.

Culture deteriorates. Organizational culture is commonly deﬁned as

the norms and values that shape how people behave. Employees learn

them not from slogans but from observation—by seeing how a boss

deals with a customer, by having a veteran employee explain the subtext

of a cryptic memo, and so on. When employees can’t make such

observations, the norms and values don’t take hold.

Today, remote and hybrid organizations often have two cultures: the

older one among those hired before the pandemic and the new one

among the workers who came on board in the remote era. That cultural divide aﬀects the interactions between and behaviors of these two employee groups. Because they have diﬀerent ideas about what is

acceptable, employees from both groups may think they are doing the right thing while behaving quite diﬀerently.

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

5

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

Commitment weakens. Commitment, or the extent to which employees

feel a tie to an organization and responsibility toward it, had been

weakening across the U.S. workforce even before the pandemic. Loyalty

was also on the wane: Workers hopped from one organization to the

next, and employers hired from the outside instead of promoting from

within or training employees to take on new challenges. To the extent

that it exists, commitment now is largely based on ties to people—to

your boss who looks after you or to your coworkers with whom you

have relationships. In remote operations, those connections are weaker,

because employees simply do not see one another as much and virtual

meetings do not build social ties the way that face-to-face meetings do.

People are socially isolated. Soon after remote work settled in, people

began to learn the downside of working at home instead of in the

oﬃce: They made fewer friends at work and missed socializing in

person. (No one in our focus groups reported making a work friend with

whom they socialized in person.) The relative social isolation means

that communication networks across organizations have narrowed and become more static. This has deleterious eﬀects on collaboration and

# performance.

# Why Hybrid Doesn’t Solve the Problems

Hybrid work—where employees spend some time in the oﬃce and some

time working remotely—sounds like a good way to balance employees’

interest in spending more time at home with employers’ interest in

fostering collaboration and connection and avoiding the problems we

have described. But it is not working.

One reason is that employers, having cut oﬃce space in reaction to

the pandemic and to save on real estate costs, often resort to hoteling,

or hot-desking. To make this practice more eﬃcient, companies have

moved toward greater use of open oﬃces with no partitions between

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

6

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

workspaces, which many employees hate. Hoteling also means that

even when people do come into the oﬃce, they may not be able to ﬁnd a

# desk near their teammates.

The limited amount of oﬃce space also makes it impossible to hold

“anchor days”—when everyone is in the oﬃce at the same time—

to build community. Making matters worse, leaders have tended to

delegate decisions about returning to the oﬃce to line managers, who

have had the unpleasant task of confronting team members who have diﬀering preferences for in-person days or don’t want to be in the oﬃce

at all. The compromise has often been either to let individual employees

pick their own days to come in, which means teammates aren’t working

on-site at the same time, or to abandon enforcement of the return-to-

# work mandate.

Clearly, hybrid approaches aren’t working. According to a 2024 survey

## of 713 managers of U.S. businesses by ResumeTemplates.com, a career

development hub, more than three-quarters of them reported that

compliance with attendance policies was a problem. Nearly half said

that employees weren’t coming in on designated days, and 40% said

employees were not staying for the full day.

“Hybrid” is a catchall term, of course, and the question of degree

matters. If a company institutes a “work from home on Fridays in the

summer” policy, which ﬁts the hybrid deﬁnition, working relationships are unlikely to suﬀer. But when employees individually choose which

days to work on-site, usually can’t sit near teammates, and bear no

consequences if they don’t come in, companies will encounter many of

the problems discussed above. The bottom line is that people just aren’t

in the oﬃce together enough—and companies are doing little to reverse

that or to adapt their management practices to suit the new reality.

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

7

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

# Practical Steps for Leaders

JPMorgan Chase and Amazon, among others, have said they would

create more oﬃce space to accommodate their reinstituted, mandatory,

ﬁve-days-a-week in-oﬃce policies. But that is an expensive proposition,

and it is proving harder to do than expected. Amazon, for one, had to

## postpone its policy at dozens of its U.S. oﬃces.

For companies that are stuck for the time being with a remote or

hybrid model—either because they can’t or don’t want to expand their

oﬃce space or because they don’t want to alienate employees who like

working from home—a few actionable steps can help.

Assess the situation. The ﬁrst step is ﬁguring out if you have problems.

IT departments can help by analyzing data from corporate calendar

software to determine whether the number of participants in meetings

has increased since the switch to remote or hybrid work. They can

look at whether the duration of meetings is up, whether postmeeting

meetings are more common, and how often employees select the

“unavailable” option on their calendars. IT can also assess how long

it takes for pings on asynchronous tools like Microsoft Teams to be

answered.

Create and enforce rules. Some issues caused by remote work are so

widespread that most managers can safely assume their company has them. The most obvious is the ineﬀectiveness of virtual meetings. Rules

governing them are long overdue, and many are easy to implement.

For starters, limit attendees to those involved in the issues or decisions at hand. And since we know that when cameras are oﬀ participants

are not paying attention, institute a simple rule: Your camera must

be on or don’t attend the meeting. Rules like these are a hallmark of

successful fully virtual companies. For example, software ﬁrm Atlassian has a process that teams use to continually monitor the eﬀectiveness

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

8

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

of their meeting practices and determine which are worth keeping and

which should be changed or dropped.

# Ricky Adam

Rules must also be put in place to prevent the focus on individual

KPIs from crowding out cooperation and collaboration. For example,

GitLab, a fully remote open-source software-development platform, has

## hundreds of pages of descriptions of when and how employees should

interact. Companies with hybrid or remote workers should create their

own rules, such as: You must respond immediately when a colleague

marks a request as “urgent.” Provide guidance as to what qualiﬁes

as urgent and intervene if an employee routinely sends out “urgent”

requests for matters that are not time-sensitive. Companies can also

require employees to designate certain hours each day when they are

# available to coworkers.

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

9

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

The most important change that hybrid organizations can make is to

enforce all policies. Managers should record attendance and punish

employees who don’t comply with rules, meeting hosts should ask

employees who violate the “cameras on” rule to leave the meeting, and

so on. When a prominent rule is widely ignored, it leads employees to

think that other rules can be ignored as well.

Rules must come from the top and be enforced at every level of

the organization. Allowing managers to set their own policies creates

obvious inequities across the organization, where people with identical jobs are governed by diﬀerent policies. Supervisors should receive

training on how to manage exceptions without setting precedents—for

instance, by making exceptions temporary and agreeing in advance on

the circumstances that will end the arrangement.

Revamp performance appraisals. Just knowing that certain types of behavior are being examined can aﬀect employee behavior.

Accordingly, managers should tell employees that their KPIs include

responding in a timely manner to requests for help and mentoring

or assisting new hires—and that these will be factors in determining

bonuses, merit raises, and promotions. Managers should also ask

their reports for feedback on colleagues and recognize exemplary

collaborators with spot bonuses and public praise. As for criticism, it

should be delivered when the moment is fresh. Body language and tone can either soften or stiﬀen a message, so give negative feedback

## in person or in an on-camera conversation.

Companies with fully remote workforces emphasize the importance

## of transparency and documentation in building trust. Managers

should clearly deﬁne and document KPIs (“This is what we expect”),

and employees should carefully track their performance (“This is

what I have achieved”). Having detailed records of expectations and

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

10

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

performance can help allay concerns about “proximity bias”—those

who are in the oﬃce more have more opportunities to impress their

bosses. However, managers should be mindful that it is quite time-

consuming for employees to continually document everything they are

doing. Managers should also take into account the bias inherent in self-

# reporting.

Revise career planning and advancement. As noted above, promoting

people to management positions on the basis of strong individual performance can backﬁre; such people often are ineﬀective leaders. So

how do managers make decisions about career advancement when they

cannot easily observe how well remote workers get along with others,

whether they support peers and subordinates, and so forth? Many fully

remote companies—including Atlassian, GitLab, and Shopify—rely on

## an array of peer assessments, such as 360-degree feedback, that focus

on behavior and interpersonal skills. These reports are subjective, of

course, but in remote contexts there are few better alternatives.

Managers should be aware that remote or hybrid workers may not know

what jobs they might aspire to or would be suited for because they

lack the opportunity to observe people in other roles. Managers can

## better inform workers about professional development opportunities

by making job descriptions more detailed and explicit. Companies can

expose employees to possible career paths using internal job markets,

or talent marketplaces, which allow employees to apply for other jobs

in the ﬁrm, work temporarily on projects, and take side assignments

without leaving their current job. (See “How to Design an Internal

Talent Marketplace,” HBR, May–June 2023.) All these opportunities

help employees build relationships across units and functions.

Establish in-ofﬁce anchor days. Anchor days for hybrid workforces are

only worthwhile if everyone can actually be there, so attendance should

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

11

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

be mandatory. The optimal number of days per week varies: Companies

whose work relies less on collaboration might ﬁnd that two days per

week is suﬃcient; other companies may need at least three days.

Employers that can’t get the entire workforce in the oﬃce on anchor

days have a big challenge. Managers need to consider this problem

when making future decisions about hiring and facilities. In the

meantime, companies can take partial measures, such as having diﬀering anchor days for various teams or invoking rules that focus on

relationship-building with geographically dispersed employees.

Build social relationships. An obvious place to forge connections is

with new hires during onboarding. Keep them together in cohorts so

that they can bond and learn from one another. Partner new hires with

experienced mentors to show them the ropes. Create a list of important

people whom new hires should meet and send introductions to make

sure that those meetings happen.

Creating working relationships across teams—where the biggest gaps

are now—is also vitally important. So map out the groups that have

critical interactions with one another, and as a start, bring them

together for a series of working lunches, two groups at a time. Plan the

seating to mix up team members. Use the working part of the lunch

to identify what the groups need from each other, discuss the most

important items, and identify whom to contact with various questions.

Any program that brings employees together has the added beneﬁt of

building personal relationships. Volunteering in the community can

be especially powerful as employees work together on a common and

meaningful goal. (For more on building relationships among employees,

## see “We’re Still Lonely at Work,” HBR, November–December 2024.)

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

12

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

Support employees’ well-being and mental health. Most managers

can tell when employees are struggling by observing them in the

workplace every day. It is much harder to spot problems with only

## occasional glimpses of a team member on a computer screen. Even

when a manager does learn that a remote employee is not doing

well, it can be tricky to navigate discussions about getting help from

employee assistance programs or other resources. Due to growing

concerns about employee mental health, managers should be required

to have routine employee check-ins, and if these have to be done

remotely, supervisors need training and access to resources on how

to better assess employees’ well-being in a virtual context. Managers

can also promote their reports’ well-being by establishing and enforcing

## boundaries between work and personal lives, especially about the hours

for scheduling meetings.

Make connecting and communicating a management priority. Many

of our recommendations have one overarching implication for how

managers do their jobs: Managers must spend more time connecting

## their reports with one another and to the organization. Recent research

found that the main task of supervisors with remote workers is to keep

them connected and updated on what’s happening in the oﬃce; what

might be changing about business priorities, norms, and values; and what is happening with team members that might aﬀect projects. All

this requires much more of the supervisor’s time than it does in oﬃce settings. (See “What Great Remote Managers Do Diﬀerently,” HBR.org,

Oct. 26, 2022.)

Virtual companies such as Atlassian go to great lengths to make

everything transparent. They document everything with a single,

deﬁnitive online ledger that lets employees see where projects

stand, what the performance objectives are, what is changing in the organization that might aﬀect their jobs, and so forth.

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

13

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.

## HBR / Magazine Article / Hybrid Still Isn’t Working

. . .

Employees today see remote work practices as the new normal, and

resistance to the changes we have recommended may be great. A crucial

ﬁrst step in overcoming it is making the case that new policies are

necessary: “A lack of cooperation among employees is causing the

following performance problems, and we have to ﬁx them.” Then it

falls to leaders to institute new rules and practices—and enforce them. Fully remote companies oﬀer a road map, but for most companies the

administrative burden will be onerous for supervisors and managers,

who are increasingly squeezed by other demands. Ultimately, many organizations will ﬁnd that it is easier and more eﬀective to bring

everyone back to the oﬃce—but those that can’t accommodate their

workforce on-site or are reluctant to do so will have to manage diﬀerently. For these organizations, redesigning how hybrid work

functions is the only way forward.

A version of this article appeared in the July–August 2025 issue of Harvard Business Review.

Peter Cappelli is the George W. Taylor Professor of Management at the Wharton School and the director of its Center for Human Resources. He is the coauthor of In Praise of the Office: The Limits to Hybrid and Remote Work (Wharton School Press, forthcoming).

Ranya Nehmeh is a senior HR strategist working on topics related to people strategy, HR policy, leadership development, and talent management in global multicultural environments. She is a coauthor of In Praise of the Office: The Limits to Hybrid and Remote Work (Wharton School Press, forthcoming).

Copyright © 2025 Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.

14

This document is authorized for use only by Matt O'Donnell (matthew.od11@gmail.com). Copying or posting is an infringement of copyright. Please contact customerservice@harvardbusiness.org or 800-988-0886 for additional copies.