4

# Training and Workplace Learning

# Karen Evans and Natasha Kersh

# Introduction

The issue of learning at work and the significance of different configurations of “learning in, for and through the workplace” (Evans et al., 2006) have been discussed extensively in a number of research publications in recent years (e.g., Aspin et al., 2012; Malloch et al., 2011; Evans et al., 2006; Rainbird, Fuller, & Munro, 2004; Boud, 2006; Guile, 2010a). Aspects such as learning on the job, informal learning and competence development, knowledge management, and the role of digital technologies have been recognized as important areas of research. Rapid changes in economic and social development and the impact of globalization have contributed to the changes in perception of adult and work- place learning and have facilitated the changing nature of the learning space at work. Workplace learning has been recognized as a core component of national and international strategies for lifelong learning, which aim to bring about higher participation in learning by workers as well as expanding the range of learning activities and achievements accessed in, for, or through the workplace.

In this chapter we will start by considering the concept of workplace learning, looking at the workplace through the lens of theoretical approaches to learning at work, spe- cifically drawing on theoretical perspectives developed in Evans et al. (2006), Mal- loch et al. (2011), and Billett (2011). The complex interdependencies between work, learning, and agency have been underpinned by the interplay between the three scales of workplace learning: organizational, individual, and environmental. This chapter will further consider a range of configurations of these three scales, firstly, looking at the notion of the learning space at work and discussing the ways it facilitates individual engagement and the organizational context in the workplace. The chapter will then discuss the concept of competence development at work, also considering motivational factors within different types of environments. The nature of skills and competences required by contemporary workplaces has been changing gradually. Factors such as the

The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of the Psychology of Training, Development, and Performance Improvement, First Edition. Edited by Kurt Kraiger, Jonathan Passmore, Nuno Rebelo dos Santos, and Sigmar Malvezzi. © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2015 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

# Training and Workplace Learning

development of the knowledge economy and rapidly changing workplace environments underpin the recognition and value of both occupationally specific competences and so-called “softer” transferrable skills, which could be used across different contexts and settings. The chapter will consider the ways in which the acquisition of skills in the work- place is associated with a range of spatial dimensions, also looking at factors that relate to the development of modern technologies. The concluding part will pull together issues considered within this chapter, and will discuss the interpretations and the inter- play between the individual, organizational, and environmental dimensions of workplace learning.

The chapter will draw on these key terms that together constitute the concept of workplace learning, looking specifically at their structure, meaning, and affordances. The three scales, namely those of individual, environmental, and organizational, will provide a framework for discussion of learning at work, and will consider the role of individuals and employers within the general context of the contemporary workplace learning space.

Learning in, for, and through the Workplace

“Workplace learning” is a term open to wide-ranging interpretation. As noted by Lee et al. (2004) and Fenwick (2006) there is neither a singular definition nor a unified approach to what workplace learning is, what it should comprise, or for whom it is or should be intended. Definitions, terminology, and perceptions related to learning in the workplace vary between studies, including the use of terms such as work-related learning (Streumer & Kho, 2006), work-based learning (Avis, 2004) or learning at work (Boud & Garrick, 1999). Workplace learning as a concept has been considered through the lens of different theoretical perspectives, such as situated learning (Lave & Wenger, 1998), activity theory (Engestrom, 2001) and social ecology (Evans, Waite, & Kersh, 2011). The body of liter- ature related to issues of human resources and management draws on the concept of workplace learning specifically considering the concept through the theories of knowledge management and organizational learning at work. Cairns and Malloch (2011) suggest that there is a need for a broader conceptualization of workplace learning, arguing that work should be understood and defined as more than employment for remuneration, and the concept of workplace learning needs to be considered in the context of three terms: work, place, and learning.

In order to develop our conceptualization of workplace learning, we draw, in the first place, on Unwin and Fuller’s (2003) definition that helpfully embraces all types of learning generated from or stimulated by the needs of the workplace, including formal on-the-job training, informal learning, and work-related off-the-job education and training. Evans et al. (2006) have further drawn on this definition in their formulation of workplace learning as that learning which derives its purpose from the context of employment, that is learning in, for, and through the workplace. Such a perspective on workplace learning, as Evans et al. (2006) argue, aims to address the needs of a variety of stakeholders: employees, employers, and government. In their approach, learning in the workplace relates to differ- ent types of learning including both formal and informal learning modes, where some of the learning takes place spontaneously through social interaction, observation, and a range of work activities and experiences. Learning is perceived here as something that “you do continually whilst at work, both out of choice and by necessity” (Gray et al., 2004, p. vii). Similarly, “most of what we learn takes place at work rather than on formal courses. Work activities, the workplace, the supervisor, other workers … are the key learning resources

# 51

# 52

# Training

for workers” (Malone, 2005, p. 67). Workers learn through experience in and reflection on their work practice; they share ideas and stories between themselves (Jarvis, 1987; Harris & Chisholm, 2011)

The significance of learning opportunities that are accessed as part of the employment relationship has been further emphasized by Evans et al. (2006), and conceptualized as learning through the workplace, which is accessed by employees through their relation- ships with the employer. Finally, learning for the workplace refers to learning opportu- nities that may be directly or indirectly related to the job, such as general education or job-specific training, which may take place outside the workplace. The formulation by Evans et al. (2006) of workplace learning as learning in, for, and through the workplace brings together and underpins the individual, organizational, and environmental scales of learning at work.

Considering an organizational perspective, Fuller and Unwin (2011) draw attention to the debate about “high-” and “low-”performing work organizations, further con- cluding that the way work is organized contributes to organizational performance and affects how the workplace is experienced by employees. They caution that high-per- formance management models need to be tested to distinguish how experiences of employees’ groups may differ and to uncover the organizational and sectoral condi- tions influencing their negative or more positive perceptions (Fuller & Unwin, 2011). Such an argument, as Fuller and Unwin (2011) observe, raises the question of how the workplace could be reconfigured to facilitate more efficient organizational learning, where the learning organization should respond to the demands of both the organ- ization and the individual. Realizing learning in organizations has been perceived as one of the challenges in the area of human resource development (HRD) (Marsick & Watkins, 1999; Jayanti, 2012). Remedios and Boreham (2004, p. 220) argue that a necessary feature for an organization to call itself a learning one is that “mechanisms are put in place to optimize the transfer of knowledge between all levels of employees.” A consequence of these mechanisms is the creation of environments where employees recognize that their ideas will be acknowledged and discussed and can influence subsequent working procedures (Remedios & Boreham, 2004, p. 220). The environ- ment is thus integral to the development of work process knowledge in the workforce (Fischer & Boreham, 2004).

This brings us to the discussion of the importance of the individual level. The central role and significance of the self and personal agency is now being accounted for within the explanation of workplace learning (Billett, 2011). Within the workplace, personal expectations and goals act as a motivating direction for the future as personal anticipa- tion and hope are also part of the identity formation process (Gnaur, 2010). Issues such as the significance of individual biography (e.g., Hodkinson et al., 2004; Hodkinson, 1995), individual disposition in relation to workplace opportunities (Ecclestone, Biesta, & Hughes, 2009; Evans et al., 2006; Evans, Kersh, & Sakamoto, 2004) and the impact of individual perspective on knowledge and learning at work (Eraut, 2004) have received recognition in the current debate about the workplace learning. Eraut (2004) argues that situational understanding in the workplace is highly dependent on individual experiences. Although, in his work, he draws strongly on the concept of situated learning, Eraut also maintains that Lave and Wenger’s (1998) treatment of their own concept overlooks the significance of the individual perspective on knowledge and learning. Billet (2011) notes that workplace participatory practices constitute a means of understanding individual participation and learning in the workplace, and further concludes that they comprise a duality between the affordance of the workplace and the individual engagement with that which they are afforded. The affordances and opportunities provided by the workplace are

# Training and Workplace Learning

strongly related to the nature of the environment at work, which influences the way adults learn in and through the workplace and underpins the interplay between individual agency, learning, work, and organizational structures in the workplace. This interplay, considered through the lens of social-ecological interdependencies, draws attention to the ways – as Evans, Waite, and Kersh (2011) put it – individuals and groups have spaces in which to exercise agency, while also influencing the whole dynamic at work through the interde- pendencies involved. The environmental scale of workplace learning further encompasses the complexities of the nature of environments at work, which could expand or restrict learning (Fuller & Unwin, 2004). Rapidly changing perceptions and the nature of the workplace – as a space for learning, work, and social engagement – have been facilitated by the current drive towards knowledge-based economies and the notion of learning societies in the contemporary world.

## Learning Spaces at Work: From Work and Training to Learning?

The interplay between training and learning at work has received recognition as one of the central tenets of the debate on contemporary workplace skills and competence development. The traditional model of work-based learning was the “one-off, pre-service education and training model” (Hodkinson & Bloomer, 2002). Thus, the traditional view of work-based learning was that it mainly consisted of qualifications or training (such as the apprenticeship model) gained prior to employment or progression in employment. This model is being challenged by the interest in “workforce development” and the changes in the perceptions of the learning spaces at work. The perception of the workplace as a site only for work and organization-specific training is gradually changing, as workplaces are now being acknowledged as sites for learning in various configurations, contributing to lifelong learning, personal development, and social engagement of indi- viduals (Field, Gallacher, & Ingram, 2009; Fuller et al., 2007; Heiskanen & Heiskanen, 2011; Guile, 2010b) as well as the exercise of wider social responsibility in and through learning (Evans, 2009). What employees learn as “learners in the workplace” and in experiences beyond the workplace (Livingstone, 2006) leads to the development of new forms of knowledge and competence, for example, job-specific, occupational, or personal. Evans et al. (2006) distinguish between workplace training and learning by making a point that training implies an intervention that is formally structured and involves a transfer of a body of knowledge, while workplace learning is more encompassing and involves locating learning in social relations at work (Evans et al., 2006). Workplace learning could be further facilitated within a learning organization. Remedios and Boreham (2004) note that a necessary feature for an organization to label itself a learning one is that mechanisms are put in place to optimize the transfer of knowledge between all levels of employees thus creating an environment where employees recognize that their ideas will be acknowledged, discussed and can influence subsequent working procedures.

Different types of learning modes are playing an increasingly prominent role in facili- tating employee learning in the workplace, as the search, often policy-driven, for ways of involving adults in continuing learning has emphasized that learning may occur in set- tings other than the classroom, in a range of formal and informal environments, including workplace sites, virtual learning, home or leisure settings (Evans, Kersh, & Kontiainen, 2004). Different modes of learning embedded in experiential, community-based, and

# 53

# 54

# Training

work-based learning have become more prominent in recent years (Kolb, 1984; Beckett & Hager, 2002; Fuller & Unwin, 2004) . Learning and acquiring skills through a range of experiences including learners’ own life experiences facilitate links and mutual interac- tion between learning, work, and leisure. Previous research (Kersh, Evans, & Kontiainen, 2011) has indicated that the concept of the learning space can be considered from various angles and perspectives. Firstly, the learning space can be perceived as a physical space where learning is taking place such as a classroom or any other form of teaching space. O’Toole (2001) notes that the physical surroundings are often overlooked in discussions of learning in the workplace. However, as Peponis argues, it is important to acknowledge that workplace design and layout provide an intelligible framework, and the structure of space supports an organizational culture with cognitive functions (Peponis et al., 2007). Secondly, the learning space can refer to a space where learning occurs unintentionally, such as informal learning, for example, at work where employees learn from each other’s experiences (Garrick, 1997; Coffield, 2000; Cross, 2006; McGivney, 2006). Thirdly, the recent expansion of digital technologies has resulted in the development and growth of virtual learning spaces that ultimately change the boundaries of learning spaces, making them more flexible and mobile (Felstead & Jewson, 2012). Finally, the learning space can be perceived as a combination or overlap of a range of components, such as physical space, learning contexts and environments, formal/informal learning, and virtual learning. Recent trends in economic, political, and educational developments have resulted in some- what blurred boundaries between the spaces in which learning, work, and leisure occur.

Workplace spaces are characterized by being both work and learning spaces where the boundaries between the two are considerably blurred (Solomon, Boud, & Rooney, 2006, p. 6). Situated learning theory further enriches the concept of the learning space by reminding us that learning spaces extend beyond the teacher and the classroom (Kolb & Kolb, 2005). Solomon, Boud, and Rooney (2006) further draw on the term “work- place learning,” arguing that this notion has particular meanings and practices because of its location and because that location is not an educational institution. Drawing on the work of Bronfenbrenner (1977, 1979), Kolb and Kolb (2005) refer to four types of learning space. The learner’s immediate setting, such as a course or classroom, is defined as the microsystem. In this research we also extend the concept of the microsystem to the learner’s immediate workplace setting since we consider workplaces as learning sites. Other concurrent settings in a person’s life such as other courses or family are called the mesosystem. The exosystem refers to the formal and informal social structures that influence the learner’s immediate environment, for example, institutional policies and procedures and culture. Finally, the macrosystem relates to the overarching institutional patterns and values of the wider culture, such as cultural values favoring abstract knowledge over practical knowledge, which influence actors in the person’s immediate microsystem and mesosystem.

The significance of the mesosystem, the learners’ parallel lives and experience, has been emphasized by our empirical data (Kersh, Evans, & Kontiainen, 2011). One configuration of the mesosystem has been associated with the development of modern technologies that allows learners to extend their learning spaces to a variety of environments, including home and workplace settings. The expansion of digital technologies provides learners with oppor- tunities to access and undertake learning activities in a range of other settings, including home and workplace environments, public libraries and youth centers, and even on trains and buses. Felstead and Jewson (2012) observe that the recent developments in information technology have weakened the spatial fix, with workers becoming increasingly detached from personal cubes of space. The use of devices such as computers, laptops, mobile phones, and netbooks has contributed to the development of the virtual learning space where learning

# Training and Workplace Learning

might not be associated with a specific site or specific time. The virtual learning environ- ment provides a degree of flexibility for the learner, enabling them to acquire learning at a time and place convenient for them. The use of new technologies has been gradually changing approaches to and ways of teaching and learning in work- related environments. In this con- text the concept of mobile learning has been emphasized. As Pachler, Pimmer, and Seipold (2011) stress, mobile learning is not simply about delivering content to mobile devices but, instead, about the processes of coming to know and being able to operate successfully in and across new and ever-changing contexts and learning spaces.

# Competence Development and the Workplace

Over the past decade one of the main concerns of governments has been to raise the skills level of the population as a way of increasing competitiveness in the global economy (Guile, 2011). The new debate has highlighted the need to understand better the part played by development of competences in promoting “knowledge-based” economies and societies. Competence is indisputably a complex concept and can be interpreted in a variety of ways (Issit, 1995; Hodkinson, 1995; Eraut, 1994). As Gonczi (1999) notes, the mean- ings given to competence in everyday life, in vocational education and training settings and in academic settings are quite different. What is more, the meaning is likely to change over time within each of these contexts.

“Workplace competence” is a term that has not been clearly defined and explained, and the terms “competence” and “competency,” which are often used interchangeably, are attributed multiple meanings depending on the context and the perspective advo- cated (Garavan & McGuire, 2001). As similarly noted in one of the CEDEFOP (The European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training) publications, the use of this term is shown to be particularly ambiguous and applicable to various situations with different meanings, specifically, as different countries or regions have their own definition of competence and each sector or occupational family has its own interpretation (Winter- ton, Delamare-Le Deist, & Stringfellow, 2006; Mulder, 2007). Eraut and Hirsh (2007) acknowledge that the term “competency” has been most commonly used either in a direct performance-related sense (as an element of vocational competence) or simply to describe any piece of knowledge or skill that might be construed as relevant. The former relates to the prevalent conception of “skills” that links it to tasks where performance of that task is subject to subsequent measurement of the intended consequences, or “outcomes,” of learning (Oates, 2004; Hyland, 1994; Jessup, 1991). The learning outcomes approach has been adopted as a way to recognize knowledge, skills, and competences across the labor market Europe-wide (Gough, 2013). Eraut’s and Hirsh’s own definition of the term “competence” emphasizes the significance of links between the individual’s capabilities and their competences: competence is “being able to perform the tasks and roles required to the expected standard” (Eraut & Hirsh, 2007, p. 7). In their interpretation, the word “competent,” unlike terms such as “knowledge,” “learning,” and “capability,” entails a social judgment, which may vary across contexts and over time and also, sometimes, with the experience, responsibility and reputation of the person concerned. Illeris (2009, 2011) similarly observes that the term “competence” is now perceived as a modern expression for what a person is actually able to do or achieve, and further concludes that, in recent years, the concept of competence has taken a central position, and more or less displaced the concept of qualifications. As a result, the workplace and a range of other work- related learning spaces are seen as primary sites for the acquisition and development of work- related competences (e.g., Ellström, 2001; Eraut, 2000; Evans et al., 2006; Illeris, 2011;

# 55

# 56

# Training

Fuller & Unwin, 2011). Evans et al. (2006) identify different forms of work-related learning that facilitate competence development in its “maximal” sense. Such forms of learning involve learning in, through, and for the workplace, encompassing activities such as engaging with and mastering changing tasks, roles, and environments (learning in the workplace); accessing a range of learning opportunities through the workplace (learning through the workplace); and engaging in various opportunities for learning for the work- place, which are of particular significance for those who are seeking to re-enter the work- place after a period of absence caused by unemployment or family circumstances. Evans et al.’s view of competences (2006) broadly emphasizes individuals’ participation in social situations, also embodying the mental, emotional, and physical processes that are integral to the development and expansion of human capacities. Such an interpretation relates to the conceptualization proposed by Illeris of the concept of competence, which is to use it “as a point of departure for a more nuanced understanding of what learning efforts today are about – with a view of reaching theoretically based and practically tested proposals concerning how up-to-date competence development can be realised for different people in accordance with their possibilities and needs, both within and outside of institution- alised educational programmes” (Illeris, 2011, p. 42).

# Supporting Competence Development through “Basic Skills” Programs in the Workplace

Skills such as literacy, numeracy, and information technology have been identified as essential enablers for employees to engage fully in learning and competence development within their workplaces (Evans & Waite, 2009, 2010; Wolf & Evans, 2011). The signifi- cance of employing “basic skills” in the workplace has been identified as related both to employees’ biographical life experiences and their workplace learning as well as career and life chances. The contemporary workplaces are now increasingly demanding from their employees satisfactory levels of literacy, numeracy, and information technology skills, expecting them to be able to cope with both traditional and online types of paperwork. In the UK the educational and labor market policy context has generated an unprecedented demand for workplace-located basic skills programs as part of a national strategy (Evans, Waite, & Kersh, 2011), which resulted in the setting up of “Skills for Life” courses across all sectors of the economy and public sector starting in 2002. Research (e.g., Evans, Waite, & Kersh, 2011) has indicated that the workplace “Skills for Life” program has been associ- ated with a range of personal and professional outcomes for the employees who took part in these programs. Acquiring or developing relevant basic skills within the workplace has supported some employees into activities that facilitated their competence development (personal or professional) through a range of workplace affordances and life experiences. The extent to which the employees may use, apply, or develop further their skills for life is often integral to the organizational dynamic at work, which either limits or facilitates the workplace environment as a learning space. The research has identified the link between the “Skills for Life” courses and employee motivations and attitudes, specifically related to contrasting the workplace-related provision with school-based learning, which, in some cases, has been associated with negative experiences. Employee engagement in the “Skills for Life” programs in the workplace illustrates the interplay between various configura- tions of the learning space. Embarking on literacy and numeracy courses in the workplace changes and challenges traditional perceptions of the workplace physical space as a location designated for performing exclusively work activities. At the same time, acquiring a range

# Training and Workplace Learning

of “skills for life” enabled employees to use and develop them in other contexts and settings, for example, in their home environments. The interdependencies and interplay in learning between the different contexts and settings are underpinned, in part, by the development of “skills for life” acquired through workplace-located courses.

## Rethinking the “Transferability” of Competences: Tacit vs. Explicit

The debate on work-related competences has highlighted the issue of the significance of developing personal competences and abilities that people can use in a variety of settings, including workplace settings (Evans, 2002; Evans, Kersh, & Sakamoto, 2004; Eraut, 2004). The definition of the term “competence” offered by Eraut and Hirsh (2007), quoted above, emphasizes the important links between individuals’ capabilities and their competences. All their competences will be, as Eraut and Hirsh (2007) explain, within their capability; but not all their capabilities will be needed for any specific job. Therefore, they will also have additional capabilities, which may have a tacit dimension. Such addi- tional capabilities may be helpful both in enhancing one’s competences through further learning (Eraut & Hirsh, 2007) and in facilitating the processes by which competences learned in one context can be developed and used in different contexts and settings. Evans’ research (Evans, Kersh, & Sakamoto, 2004) develops a model of key competences that has emphasized a broad cluster of capabilities coming together in ways that generate growth, movement, and future development, which are important in negotiating changes of work and learning environments, including the following:

- methodological competences, • competences related to attitudes and values, • learning competences, • social and interpersonal competences, and • content-related and practical competences.

This clustering of competences is useful as it provides us with a broad framework for categorizing a range of workplace competences, which may be further developed or applied through workplace affordances and opportunities. Boud and Garrick (1999, p. 1) similarly observe that employees are extending their educational capabilities in learning through their work: “opportunities and problems within work are creating the need for new knowledge and understanding. Employees develop skills of expression and communi- cation which spill over into their personal lives. They learn new ways of collaboration and planning which they apply in their families and community organisations to which they belong.” The discussion on conceptualizing and understanding work-related competences has underlined the importance of gaining a better understanding of how knowledge and competences are used and developed as people move between different contexts and set- tings, including both workplace and other informal/formal settings. While the metaphor of “transfer” has been dominant in recent times (Burke & Hutchins, 2007), the current debate has extensively problematized this notion, which often pays insufficient attention to the processes involved in recontextualizing skills and knowledge in order to put them to work in new and changing contexts (see Hager & Hodkinson, 2009; Evans & Guile, 2012). In this context, the role played by tacit skills as well as interdependences and inter- play between tacit and explicit dimensions at work have been identified as factors affecting

# 57

# 58

# Training

the transferability and use of skills and competences in a range of settings and spaces. Tacit skills are generally thought of as the “hidden” dimensions of the skills and competences that people can learn from a variety of experiences, such as formal education, the work- place, family experience, informal learning. “Tacit skills” is a term that is open to wide interpretation. Definitions and terminology related to those intangible skills varies from study to study, including terms such as “informal skills,” “tacit skills,” “personal skills,” “soft skills,” and “interpersonal skills.” However, all these terms refer to hidden skills that are difficult to communicate, transmit, and acknowledge. The benefits of capturing such skills for the purpose of recognition and accreditation may be the most relevant measure of progress for a number of different kinds of learners.

The research literature on competence development through workplace learning has recognized the significance of tacit skills in the workplace. (Corno, Reinmoeller, & Nonaka, 1999; Eraut, 2000; Hager, 2000). Various approaches to conceptualizing tacit skills and competences have tended to be shaped by different epistemological stances. Tacit skills conceptualizations and explorations have been discussed within the literatures on knowledge management (e.g., Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995; McInerney, 2002), scientific knowledge (Polanyi, 1962, 1966), and the knowledge economy (Guile, 2010a). Most of the approaches have drawn on making a distinction between tacit and explicit knowledge and attempted to provide a framework for capturing and identifying tacit knowledge with a primary purpose of making tacit knowledge explicit. Two famous attempts to capture and make tacit knowledge explicit include Nonaka and Takeuchi’s cycle of knowledge conversion and Eraut’s elicitation method. Their research draws our attention to the role of tacit skills in workplace contexts.

Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) undertook their research in large Japanese car manu- facturing companies (such as Toyota and Honda). The primary focus of their inquiries was the issue of knowledge management and knowledge creation in large companies. Their research led them to argue that the knowledge-creation process is based on a spiral- ing of interactions between explicit and tacit knowledge and the primary purpose of this process is turning tacit knowledge about products and services into explicit knowledge. Their famous “four steps” model of knowledge conversion (Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995) demonstrates the way tacit knowledge is converted into explicit knowledge, which ul- timately contributes to the process of knowledge creation in an organizational context. Eraut (2004) argued, however, that while Nonaka and Takeuchi demonstrated the value of tacit knowledge and the way it may become shared through the process of interac- tions at work, most of the knowledge they described was not tacit but rather personal knowledge held by employees, which was not considered relevant to be shared. Therefore their method is useful for providing an approach to share personal knowledge through social interaction at work. The sharing of knowledge through teams and networks is particularly effective for controlling corporate networks and is done through informal task forces and committees, which nurture learning and the development of sharing (Williams, 2011). Capturing tacit knowledge, according to Eraut (2004), requires a more complex approach, which would take into account both past and present experiences of individuals. Eraut’s (2000, 2004) exploration of the concept of tacit knowledge led him to call for a greater awareness of the presence of tacit knowledge in the way we do our business and live our daily lives. Drawing on a series of large-scale and small-scale research projects, he concluded that learning occurs informally during normal working processes, and that there could be considerable scope to recognize and enhance such learning if it was sensitively elicited. His “elicitation” approach to uncover tacit skills in the workplace is based on his argument that people need to be supported to bring to the surface their tacit knowledge and skills. Elicitation is achieved by facilitating articulation or identifying

# Training and Workplace Learning

(illuminating) instances of the nature of the tacit knowledge that is being considered (Eraut, 2000, p. 119). His approach involved structured elicitation interviewing tech- niques that supported people into reflecting on their past and present experiences and skills acquired and/or employed within these experiences. Evans and colleagues (Evans, Kersh, & Sakamoto, 2004; Evans et al., 2006) have taken this approach further, specifi- cally demonstrating the way that recognition of employees’ tacit skills and personal com- petences may enhance their motivation and further facilitate their learning attitudes and willingness to take on various workplace learning opportunities. Drawing on the method suggested by Eraut, as a first step that could be used for making tacit skills visible, Evans, Kersh, and Kontiainen’s (2004) research suggested an approach that aimed to bring a new dimension to the elicitation process, which would facilitate the recognition of tacit skills through self-reflection and self-awareness. Their research, assisted by the Dynamic Con- cept Analysis (DCA) modeling method (Kontiainen, 2002) underpins the notion of tacit skills’ recognition and self-evaluation, specifically in a range of workplace contexts: such skills have strong tacit dimensions that may become explicit or visible to the holder when deployed or recognized in a relevant context or environment. The elicitation becomes a multifaceted process that involves the learners reflecting on their tacit skills and abilities and relating those to their outcomes, achievements, and learning success. Their approach involved uncovering tacit skills through the DCA graphical modeling, which enables the process of employees’ self-evaluation of their tacit skills in a variety of contexts and settings. In particular, research by Evans, Kersh, and Kontiainen (2004) has demonstrated the ways in which adult learners draw on their past experiences and skills acquired in the course of such experiences in their new settings, contexts, and learning spaces. Their research under- lines the ways in which tacit skills could be recontextualized and made relevant in a range of activities and/or contexts. The DCA method could be used and applied to uncover, evaluate, and assess adult learners’ personal/tacit skills and competences.

## The Significance of New Technologies and Skills Development

Factors such as rapid technological development and the expansion of digital technologies have had a profound impact both on the nature of the learning space at work and types of skills and competences that are required by contemporary workplaces. The current debate addresses the need to improve the digital skills of the population in both European and global contexts. Within the US context the public’s attainment of twenty-first-century digital literacy skills has been described as essential for the country’s economic success in the global environment. Two major federal initiatives – the National Broadband Plan, released in 2010, and the Broadband Technology Opportunities Program, initiated in 2009 – focused national attention on digital inclusion and spurred government agencies to develop a range of policies and programs (Digital Literacy Task Force, 2013). To address opportunities and challenges related to digital literacy and associated national policy conversations, the American Library Association’s (ALA) Office for Information Technology Policy (OITP) launched the OITP Digital Literacy Task Force in spring 2011 and brought together literacy experts and practitioners from school, academic, and public libraries (Digital Literacy Task Force, 2013). Similarly, in Europe, the issue of strength- ening the competence of the entire European labor force through digital skills proficiency has been emphasized as a critical factor in raising economic productivity. Specifically, it has been highlighted that digital skills underpin both the Europe 2020 strategy for growth and its component plan, the Digital Agenda for Europe (see, e.g., ECDL, 2012; JISC,

# 59

# 60

# Training

2012; Ferrari, 2012). In its communication E-Skills for the 21st Century: Fostering Competitiveness, Growth and Jobs, the European Commission underlined the significance of information and communication technology (ICT) skills for business development and growth and called for a greater exploitation of the potential of ICT in this context. Preliminary research (e.g., Kersh, Waite, & Evans, 2012; Kersh & Evans, 2010) has indi- cated that digital literacy is considered to be one of the most critical factors that help to improve business development and growth across all sectors and to create employment opportunities, in all partners countries (ECDL, 2012; JISC, 2012; Ferrari, 2012). The term “digital literacy” has been widely used in the context of the debate on employment and labor market opportunities, and this notion is often used in a broad sense.

The notion of digital skills and their role in facilitating individuals’ life chances and economic productivity has received considerable attention in recent research publica- tions and policy chapters internationally. The literature review has shown that this notion has become a significant concept in the contemporary debate of what types of skills and competences people should have in the knowledge society.

In 2006 the European Union recognized digital competence to be one of the eight key competences for lifelong learning, emphasizing that digital competence involves the confident and critical use of information society technology (IST) and thus basic skills in information and communication technology (European Parliament, 2006). There is a clear demand in society for facilitating transparency and standardization of the notion of digital competences in a European context. This has been underpinned by the European Commision’s Joint Research Centre report, which mapped 15 relevant competency frame- works that are currently available across Europe (e.g., ECDL, BECTA, and UNESCO) (Ferrari, 2012). Within the US context, a policy document Building Digital Commu- nities: A Framework for Action defined digital literacy as one of seven foundational prin- ciples that make up “the basic requirements for creating a digitally inclusive community” (Digital Literacy Task Force, 2013). What unites these definitions employed in different report and policy chapters is that they (in one way or another) have referred to the need to address the capability to make use of digital skills in meaningful ways for life, work, and learning. These definitions may overlap in a number of ways; however, all of them include elements that need to be considered in discussing the problem of digital competence. This suggests that we could consider the term “digital skills/competences” as an “evolving concept” that requires further research and conceptualization, specifically in the contexts of the current demands of the contemporary workplace.

The nature of skills for employment is changing as computer literacy and skills related to the use of technologies are becoming of utmost importance in the context of the modern workplace setting. In order to succeed in the labor market both young and mature employees job seekers need to be computer literate. The expansion of new technologies means that employees are increasingly expected to have good information technology skills. Williams’ research makes a point that the emergence of communica- tions technologies and their corresponding access to computer networks are associated with the term “knowledge management” at work (Williams, 2011). There is a growing tendency for “online paperwork.” In many organizations it is expected that employees are able to complete or work with various forms (e.g., reports, orders, invoices) online. The need to undertake such tasks may create stress and pressure for some staff in a range of workplaces. The data have indicated that employees who have no or limited IT skills experience difficulties in succeeding in the labor market and feel threatened and demo- tivated within their workplaces (Kersh & Evans, 2010; Kersh, Waite, & Evans, 2012). What motivates the employees is the fact that their newly acquired information technology (IT) skills might be applied immediately within their workplace settings (Kersh, Waite,

# Training and Workplace Learning

& Evans, 2012). In some cases learners felt that their IT skills really “make a difference” – in other words they enabled them to perform their jobs better. In addition, being computer literate enabled them to expand their learning environments by engaging in many types of “virtual learning” (e.g., through the internet), either tacitly or explicitly. E-learning and modern technologies provide opportunities to facilitate and support teaching practices in the workplace context, in particular by providing flexibility of time and place of delivery, allowing the sharing and re-use of resources, enabling collaborative working, and fostering learning and competence development.

The expansion of new technologies and the development of digital skills of the contem- porary workforce have an impact on the concept of the learning space. A range of skills and knowledge can be acquired in so-called virtual settings (e.g., via electronic resources). The notion of the virtual learning space further loosens the boundaries between different types of environment. However, as Kersh et al.’s research concluded (Kersh, Waite, & Evans, 2012), in order to be meaningful, e-learning processes need to be grounded in various workplace activities. Wang et al. (2010) further note that the development of work- place e-learning should consider the alignment of individual and organizational learning needs, the connection between learning and work performance, and communication among individuals. As e-learning becomes embedded in adult learning in workplace settings, it may further contribute to facilitating the development of expansive learning environments for adult learners in both workplace and college contexts. E-learning or modern technologies may provide opportunities to facilitate and support teaching practices in the workplace context, in particular by providing flexibility of time and place of delivery; allowing the sharing and re-use of resources; enabling collaborative working; and fostering learning.

# Future Research

The complex interdependencies between work, learning, and agency in the contemporary world call for the exploration of new ideas and directions in the concept of workplace learning. An emerging agenda for researching work, learning, and competence development has been strongly underpinned by issues such as globalization, the knowledge-based economy, and the learning society. The development of ideas about the knowledge economy and the learning society has facilitated the emergence of new approaches towards work- place learning and development. Further research should address a range of innovations and emerging trends that characterize the complex ways we learn “in, for, and through the workplace,” such as, for example, the role of workplace learning in employee-driven innovation ( Høyrup et al., 2012); an innovative apprenticeship model (Rauner & Smith, 2010), corporate/university partnerships (O’Connor & Lynch, 2011), or a model of lifelong learning that is associated with the model for creating new structures for accredi- tation of prior learning through reflective practice (Harris & Chisholm, 2011).

A range of international research findings suggests that the current perception of the concept of workplace learning is strongly interrelated with the notion of the learning space, in which individuals and teams work, learn, and develop their skills. The notion of the knowledge society challenges the traditional perception of the learning space, thus encour- aging us to develop a better understating of the concept of the workspace and its different configurations as well as the different types of knowledge that are “put to work” as people work and learn (Evans & Guile, 2012) . Although the notion of the learning space at work has been a subject of interest in a number of international studies, the continuous development of the learning society as well as the expansion of digital technologies call for further research to advance our knowledge and understanding of the ways individuals learn

# 61

# 62

# Training

“in, through, and for” the workplace within a range of traditional and new learning spaces. The achievement of human agency through environments is another area of research that could be further addressed, specifically by exploring different configurations of the learning space both at the workplace and beyond. The changing nature of workplace competences and the ways individuals acquire and use such competences in different learning spaces provide a basis for an emerging discussion of new types of work-related spaces. Future research can draw upon rich sources of workplace learning theories and approaches in order to expand our knowledge and understanding of the interrelationships between workplaces and individuals in the modern globalized world.

One aspect that should be not overlooked by further research on workplace learning is the international dimension in researching workplace learning. Workplace learning studies in a globalized world are increasingly drawing on the diversity of policies and practices in an international perspective. Chisholm et al. (2012), for example, have shown how trans- national explorations of Asian and European research approaches and workplace practices contribute to a better understanding of the notion of learning at work in a compara- tive perspective and provide an insight into the interrelationships between research and practice. Future approaches to researching work and learning need to take into account a significant challenge of advancing our understanding and conceptualizing the notion of workplace learning internationally. Through a dialogic approach, diverse traditions in researching learning at work (Sawchuk, 2011) can move beyond existing silos to advance theoretical understanding and enhance practice.

# Conclusion

The consideration of workplace learning and its different configurations has underpinned the complexities between work, learning, agency, and space. The interdependencies between individual engagement, competence development, and organizational context have been considered through the lens of organizational, individual, and environmental aspects. The complexities of workplace learning have been reflected in the changing requirements for competence development and its interplay with the changing nature of the learning space at work. The interrelations between the individual and environmental scales have been illustrated by the way individuals operate in their workplace environments, and the extent to the which these environments may facilitate or undermine their learning opportunities and life chances. The notion of expansive-restrictive environments (Fuller & Unwin, 2003, 2011) relates to the affordances of the workplace, which is strongly under- pinned by the organizational perspective. Organizational and sectoral conditions influence both workplace opportunities and employees’ perceptions at work. Making a workplace a learning organization has been considered as one of the challenges of contemporary work- place developments. Support for the continuous competence development of employees has been referred to as one of the factors that facilitates the learning workplace. Work- related competences are now increasingly considered in a broader sense, rather than com- petences that focus exclusively on performing narrowly defined workplace-related tasks. Individuals are now expected to use a range of competences, including personal skills, and be able to use these as they move between changing contexts, both within and outside their workplaces. The development of work-related competences is strongly influenced by the complexities of learning spaces, including the virtual learning space. As digital technologies have developed, workplace learning has further emphasized the significance of the digital skills of the workforce. The exercise of human agency through the virtual environment has the potential to facilitate learning at work, relating it to other spaces and

# Training and Workplace Learning

environments. The perspective of social ecology provides a way into understanding the complexities of factors that impact on learning in the workplace, through the interplay of actors, structures, processes, and environments. This interplay is not restricted to the work- place but involves the overlap of the learning spaces and other contexts that extend way beyond the workplace. The concept of learning in, for, and through the workplace thus attends to the social processes that shape employees’ perceptions and attitudes towards engagement in workplace learning, influencing their professional and personal development and life chances within the workplace and beyond.

# References

Aspin, D., Chapman J., Evans, K., & Bagnall, R. (Eds.) (2012). The Second International Handbook

## of Lifelong Learning. Dordrecht: Springer.

Avis, J. (2004). Work-based learning and social justice: “Learning to labour” and the new vocation-

alism in England. Journal of Education and Work, 17(2, June), 197–217.

Beckett, D., & Hager, P. (2002). Life, Work and Learning: Practice in Postmodernity. Routledge International Studies in the Philosophy of Education, vol. 14. London and New York: Routledge.

Billett, S. (2011). Subjectivity, self and personal agency in learning through and for work. In M. Malloch, L. Cairns, K. Evans, & B. N. O’Connor (Eds.), The Sage Handbook on Workplace Learning (pp. 60–72). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Boud, D. (2006). Combining work and learning: The disturbing challenge of practice. In R. Edwards, J. Gallagher, & Whittaker, S. (Eds.), Learning Outside the Academy: International Research Perspectives on Lifelong Learning (pp. 77–89). London: Routledge.

Boud, D., & Garrick, J. (1999). Understanding of workplace learning. In D. Boud & J. Garrick

## (Eds.), Understanding Learning at Work (pp. 29–44). London: Routledge.

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The Ecology of Human Development: Experiments by Nature and Design.

# Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

# Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an experimental ecology of human development. American

Psychologist, 32(7), 513–531.

Burke, L. A., & Hutchins, H. M.(2007). Training transfer: An integrative literature review. Human

## Resource Development Review, 6(3), 263–296.

Cairns, L., & Malloch, M. (2011). Theories of work, place and learning: New directions. In M. Malloch, L. Cairns, K. Evans, & B. N. O’Connor (Eds.), The Sage Handbook on Workplace Learning (pp. 3–16). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Chisholm, L., Lunardon, K., Ostendorf, A., & Pasqualoni, P.-P. (Eds.) (2012). Decoding the Meanings of Learning at Work in Asia and Europe. Conference Series. Innsbruck: Innsbruck University Press.

Coffield, F. (2000). Introduction: A critical analysis of the concept of the learning society. In F. Coffield (Ed.), Differing Visions of a Learning Society: Research Findings (vol.1, pp. 1–38). Bristol: Policy Press.

Coffield, F. (Ed.) (2000). The Necessity of Informal Learning. Bristol: Policy Press. Corno, F., Reinmoeller, P., & Nonaka, I. (1999) Knowledge creation within industrial systems.

## Journal of Management and Governance, 3, 379–394.

# Cross, J. (2006). Informal Learning: Rediscovering the Natural Pathways That Inspire Innovation

## and Performance. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Digital Literacy Task Force (2013). Digital Literacy, Libraries and Public Policies. Report of Office for Information Technology Policy’s Digital Task Force. http://www.districtdispatch.org/ wp-content/uploads/2013/01/2012_OITP_digilitreport_1_22_13.pdf (accessed August 28, 2013).

Ecclestone, K., Biesta, G., & Hughes, M. (Eds.) (2009). Transitions and Learning through the

# Lifecourse. Abingdon: Routledge.

# 63